_**International House**_ is a 1933 American pre-Code comedy film starring
Peggy Hopkins Joyce and W. C. Fields, directed by A. Edward Sutherland and
released by Paramount Pictures. The tagline of the film was "The _Grand Hotel_
of comedy". It is a mixture of comedy and musical acts tied together by a slim
plot line, in the style of the _Big Broadcast_ pictures that were also
released by Paramount during the 1930s. In addition to some typical comedic
lunacy from W. C. Fields and Burns and Allen, it provides a snapshot of some
popular stage and radio acts of the era. The film includes some risqué pre-
Code humor.

After an introductory sequence set in Shanghai, the setting shifts over 200
miles away to the International House, a large hotel in metropolitan Wuhu,
China ("Wuhu" also serves as a pun on "Woo-hoo!", an exclamation which at that
time was sometimes used to comment that something was sexually naughty or
gay).

The unifying plot line concerns Chinese inventor Dr. Wong (Edmund Breese)
soliciting bids for the rights to his "radioscope", a kind of television.
Unlike real television, his Art Deco contraption does not need a camera; it
can look in on events anywhere in the world as if it were a ground-penetrating
electronic telescope, complete with audio.

Prof. Henry R. Quail (W. C. Fields) is one of many people from around the
world converging on the hotel, though he is one of the few not hoping to buy
(or steal) Dr. Wong's invention, as he was intending to land in Kansas City in
his autogyro but flew off course. Other plot threads include four-times-
divorced American celebrity Peggy Hopkins Joyce (playing herself) avoiding one
of her ex-husbands, violently jealous Russian General Petronovich (Bela
Lugosi); Tommy (Stuart Erwin), the representative of an American electric
company, hoping to buy Wong's invention and finally wed his sweetheart Carol
(Sari Maritza); resident physician Dr. Burns (George Burns) and his goofy aide
Nurse Allen (Gracie Allen) dealing with a quarantine on the hotel; and the
exasperation of the hotel's fussy and frustrated manager (Franklin Pangborn).

All of this is broken up by demonstrations of Dr. Wong's radioscope, as well
as a floor show (featuring Sterling Holloway and Lona Andre) in the hotel's
rooftop garden restaurant. Dr. Wong is particularly eager to look in on a six-
day indoor bicycle race in New York, but instead brings in performances by
popular crooner Rudy Vallée, bandleader-vocalist Cab Calloway, and precocious
torch singer Baby Rose Marie (who won enduring fame through real television,
three decades later, playing Sally on _The Dick Van Dyke Show_ ). The droll
Stoopnagle and Budd, now-forgotten stars of a popular network radio comedy
show, are also accorded a brief segment.

When the time comes to wrap up the proceedings, Tommy wins both the rights to
the radioscope and his sweetheart, and Peggy Hopkins Joyce, having learned
that Prof. Quail is a millionaire, quickly attaches herself to her next sugar
daddy. The film ends with Prof. Quail and his new companion being chased as he
drives his little American Austin automobile through several public areas of
the hotel and down several flights of a fire escape before driving it back
into the hold of his autogyro and taking off.

_International House_ was produced before a strict Hollywood Production Code
took effect in July 1934, and it is notable for the kind of risqué subject
matter, humor and costumes associated with Pre-Code Hollywood. Top-billed
Peggy Hopkins Joyce was famous as an unabashed real-life gold-digger, not as
an actress. Her many affairs with and several marriages to wealthy older men
earned her millions, and in the film she makes several humorous references to
her profitable divorces, a topic that would become almost completely off-
limits with enforcement of the Code. Several of the "cellophane" costumes in
the "She Was a China Tea-cup" production number allow the bare outlines of
breasts to be seen, a degree of nudity that the Code would not permit.

W. C. Fields, as Professor Quail, responds to what he mistakes as homosexual
flirting with "Don't let the posy fool you", referring to his own boutonniere,
which he plucks out and tosses away. Walking down a hotel corridor, Fields
pauses to peep through a keyhole, then comments, "What won't they think of
next!" Such implications of what the Code called "sex perversion" (usually
defined then as anything other than procreative sex in the missionary
position) would soon be strictly prohibited. This was one of several films in
which Fields tweaked censors' noses with one particular deniable double
entendre. Sitting next to him in a small car, Joyce (whom he has punningly
called "my little Laplander") squirms uncomfortably and tells him she is
sitting on something. Fields checks, finds a cat under her, and exclaims, "Ah,
it's a pussy!"

Performing with his hot dance band, Cab Calloway sings "Reefer Man", which
describes the odd behavior and ravings of the titular heavy marijuana smoker
(portrayed by bass player Al Morgan, who performs as if in a trance). In one
gag, W. C. Fields enters a scene contentedly smoking an opium pipe (but with a
cigar in place of the opium) and commenting, "They stupefy! They're roasted!",
a play on two then-current cigarette advertising slogans. References to
recreational drug use were among the many Legion of Decency thou-shalt-nots
that would soon be rigidly enforced.

In the sequence with the Austin – the smallest car sold in America at that
time – W. C. Fields remarks that it "used to belong to the Postmaster
General." This was a potshot at Will Hays, the diminutive former Postmaster
General who was then trying to enforce an essentially voluntary and often
disregarded early Production Code.

On March 10, 1933, an earthquake occurred during production, and a Paramount
newsreel featured what was presented as footage of cast members on the set
reacting as it struck. A documentary featurette on W. C. Fields accompanying
the film's DVD release, however, reveals that Fields and director Sutherland
faked the footage for the publicity. The actual earthquake, centered off
nearby Long Beach, caused widespread major damage to unreinforced masonry and
about 120 consequent fatalities. A 1976 episode of the television series In
Search Of... that dealt with earthquakes showed the footage.

Lyricist Leo Robin and composer Ralph Rainger wrote three songs for the film:
"She Was a China Tea-cup and He Was Just a Mug", performed offscreen by an
unidentified male vocalist; "Thank Heaven For You", sung onscreen by Rudy
Vallee; and "My Bluebird's Singing the Blues", sung onscreen by Baby Rose
Marie. A fourth Robin-Rainger song, "Look What I've Got", originally featured
in the slightly earlier film _A Bedtime Story_ , is heard as an instrumental,
supposedly played by "Ah Phooey and His Manly Mandarins" in a broadcast from a
radio station that calls itself "The Voice of Long Tung"; it provides the
musical accompaniment for an otherwise silent he-and-she undressing scene. Cab
Calloway and His Harlem Maniacs perform 1932's "Reefer Man", written by Andy
Razaf (lyrics) and J. Russell Robinson (music).[3]

In 1996, Universal Studios Home Video released the film on VHS. In 2004, it
was released on Region 1 DVD as part of the five-disc W. C. Fields Comedy
Collection set.

