The **2015 NBA draft** was held on June 25, 2015, at Barclays Center in
Brooklyn. It was televised nationally in the U.S. by ESPN. National Basketball
Association (NBA) teams took turns selecting amateur U.S. college basketball
players and other eligible players, including international players. The draft
lottery took place on May 19, 2015.

The Minnesota Timberwolves won the draft lottery to earn the first overall
pick in the draft. It marked the first time in Timberwolves history that they
would receive the first overall pick through the lottery. The player selected
would also be the third consecutive number one pick on the Timberwolves
roster, joining Andrew Wiggins (2014) and Anthony Bennett (2013) - who were
traded to Minnesota for forward Kevin Love. This draft also gave the Los
Angeles Lakers the second overall pick after jumping over the Philadelphia
76ers and the New York Knicks within the draft lottery.

Highlights from the draft include the first Dominican to be the first overall
pick (Karl-Anthony Towns), the highest number of Kentucky Wildcats selected in
the draft lottery (four with Karl-Anthony Towns, Willie Cauley-Stein, Trey
Lyles, and Devin Booker), which tied the North Carolina Tar Heels in 2005 for
most players selected in the lottery by one school; the tied record for most
Kentucky players selected in the draft (six with Towns, Cauley-Stein, Lyles,
Booker, Andrew Harrison, and Dakari Johnson), the second Latvian to have been
drafted in the first round (Kristaps Porziņģis), the first former high school
player to have skipped college to play in China that was selected in the draft
(Emmanuel Mudiay), and the first Indian to have been selected in the NBA
(Satnam Singh Bhamara), who was also the first player since 2005 to have been
drafted directly from high school (albeit as a postgraduate).

Other noteworthy announcements that came out of the draft included the
official announcement of the passing of the last pioneer of the original NBA,
Harvey Pollack, around the third pick and the resignation of the league's
president of basketball operations Rod Thorn that became official in August
after the end of the first round.

These players were not selected in the 2015 NBA draft, but have appeared in at
least one regular-season or playoff game in the NBA.

The draft was conducted under the eligibility rules established in the
league's new 2011 collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with its players
union. The CBA that ended the 2011 lockout instituted no immediate changes to
the draft, but called for a committee of owners and players to discuss future
changes.[56] Since the 2011 CBA, the basic eligibility rules have been:

Player who are not automatically eligible must declare their eligibility for
the draft by notifying the NBA offices in writing no later than 60 days before
the draft.[59][60] For the 2015 draft, this date fell on April 26. After this
date, "early entry" players may attend NBA pre-draft camps and individual team
workouts to show off their skills and obtain feedback regarding their draft
positions. Under the CBA, a player may withdraw his name from consideration
from the draft at any time before the final declaration date, which is 10 days
before the draft.[61] Under NCAA rules at that time, players only had until
April 16 to withdraw from the draft and maintain their college
eligibility.[62] In January 2016, the NCAA changed its draft withdrawal date
to 10 days after the end of the annual NBA Draft Combine in May, with the 2016
draft the first to be held under the new rule.[63]

A player who has hired an agent will forfeit his remaining college
eligibility, regardless of whether he is drafted.[64] Also, while the CBA
allows a player to withdraw from the draft twice,[61] the NCAA then mandated
that a player who declared twice lost his college eligibility.[62] The
aforementioned 2016 NCAA rule change also allowed players to declare for more
than one draft without losing college eligibility.[63]

This year, a total of 48 collegiate players and 43 international players
declared as early entry candidates before the April 26 deadline.[65] On June
15, the withdrawal deadline, 34 early entry candidates withdrew from the draft
and one early entry candidate is added, leaving 47 collegiate players and 11
international players as the early entry candidates for the draft.[66][67]

Players who do not meet the criteria for "international" players are
automatically eligible if they meet any of the following criteria:[68]

Players who meet the criteria for "international" players are automatically
eligible if they meet any of the following criteria:

Based on the eligibility rules, every college seniors who have completed their
college eligibility and every "international" players who were born on or
before December 31, 1993, are automatically eligible for the draft. However,
there are other players who became automatically eligible even though they
have not completed their four-year college eligibility.

The invitation-only NBA Draft Combine was scheduled to occur in Chicago from
May 12 to 17. The on-court element of the combine was scheduled for May 14 and
15.[80]

The NBA conducted an annual draft lottery to determine the draft order for the
teams that did not make the playoffs in the preceding season. Every NBA team
that missed the NBA playoffs had a chance at winning a top three pick, but
teams with worse records had a better chance at winning a top three pick.
After the lottery selected the teams that receive a top three pick, the other
teams received an NBA draft pick based on their winning percentage from the
prior season. The table below shows each non-playoff team's chances (based on
their record at the end of the NBA season) of receiving picks 1–14.

The 2015 NBA lottery was held on May 19.[81] The Minnesota Timberwolves, who
had the worst record in the NBA and the highest chance to win the lottery at
25%, won the lottery. The Los Angeles Lakers moved from the fourth spot to
second, while the Philadelphia 76ers got the third pick.[82] The only team
that moved down from their original draft position altogether was the New York
Knicks, who moved from the projected second pick to the fourth pick.

In the first round of the NBA draft, each team has up to five minutes to
decide which player they would like to select. The team can also propose a
trade with another team before making their selection.[83] The NBA
commissioner will announce the selection and the player, wearing a basketball
cap sporting the team's logo, comes up to the stage to be congratulated and
presented to the audience.[84][85] In the second round, each team has up to
two minutes to make their picks while the deputy commissioner assumes the
commissioner's role.[86][87]

The NBA annually invites around 15–20 players to sit in the "green room", a
special room set aside at the draft site for the invited players plus their
families and agents. When their names are called, the player leaves the room
and goes up on stage. Other players who are not invited are allowed to attend
the ceremony, sit in the stands with the fans and walk up on stage when (or
if) they are drafted.[88] The 19 players who accepted invitations to attend
the draft were Devin Booker, Willie Cauley-Stein, Sam Dekker, Jerian Grant,
Rondae Hollis-Jefferson, Stanley Johnson, Frank Kaminsky, Kevon Looney, Trey
Lyles, Emmanuel Mudiay, Jahlil Okafor, Kelly Oubre Jr., Cameron Payne, Bobby
Portis, Kristaps Porziņģis, D'Angelo Russell, Karl-Anthony Towns, Myles
Turner, and Justise Winslow.[89] International prospect Mario Hezonja did not
attend because he was still involved with his then-team FC Barcelona at the
time.[90][91] Three other players, R.J. Hunter, Tyus Jones, and Delon Wright
all had invitations as well, but they declined their invitations for
undisclosed reasons.[89]

Prior to the day of the draft, the following trades were made and resulted in
exchanges of draft picks between the teams.

The following trades involving drafted players were made on the day of the
draft.[92]

1961

1966

1967

1968

1970

1974

1980

1988

1989

1995

2004

