**Atlantic Recording Corporation** (simply known as **Atlantic Records** ) is
an American record label founded in October 1947 by Ahmet Ertegün and Herb
Abramson. Over its first 20 years of operation, Atlantic earned a reputation
as one of the most important American labels, specializing in jazz, R&B, and
soul by Aretha Franklin, Ray Charles, Wilson Pickett, Sam and Dave, Ruth Brown
and Otis Redding. Its position was greatly improved by its distribution deal
with Stax. In 1967, Atlantic became a wholly owned subsidiary of Warner
Bros.-Seven Arts, now the Warner Music Group, and expanded into rock and pop
music with releases by Led Zeppelin and Yes.

In 2004, Atlantic and its sister label Elektra were merged into Atlantic
Records Group.[2] Craig Kallman is the chairman of Atlantic. Ahmet Ertegün
served as founding chairman until his death on December 14, 2006, at age
83.[3]

In 1944, brothers Nesuhi and Ahmet Ertegun remained in the United States when
their mother and sister returned to Turkey after the death of their father
Munir Ertegun, Turkey's first ambassador to the U.S. The brothers were fans of
jazz and rhythm & blues, amassing a collection of over 15,000 78 RPM
records.[4] Ahmet ostensibly stayed in Washington to undertake post-graduate
music studies at Georgetown University but immersed himself in the Washington
music scene and entered the record business, which was enjoying a resurgence
after wartime restrictions on the shellac used in manufacture.[5] He convinced
the family dentist, Dr. Vahdi Sabit, to invest $10,000 and hired Herb
Abramson, a dentistry student.

Abramson had worked as a part-time A&R manager/producer for the jazz label
National Records, signing Big Joe Turner and Billy Eckstine. He founded
Jubilee in 1946 but had no interest in its most successful musicians. In
September 1947, he sold his share in Jubilee to his partner, Jerry Blaine, and
invested $2,500 in Atlantic.

Atlantic was incorporated in October 1947 and was run by Abramson (president)
and Ertegun (vice-president in charge of A&R, production, and promotion).
Abramson's wife Miriam ran the label's publishing company, Progressive Music,
and did most office duties until 1949 when Atlantic hired its first employee,
bookkeeper Francine Wakschal, who remained with the label for the next 49
years.[6] Miriam gained a reputation for toughness. Staff engineer Tom Dowd
recalled, "Tokyo Rose was the kindest name some people had for her"[7] and Doc
Pomus described her as "an extraordinarily vitriolic woman".[8] When
interviewed in 2009, she attributed her reputation to the company's chronic
cash-flow shortage: "... most of the problems we had with artists were that
they wanted advances, and that was very difficult for us ... we were
undercapitalized for a long time."[6] The label's office in the Ritz Hotel in
Manhattan proved too expensive, so they moved to a room in the Hotel
Jefferson.[9][10][11] In the early fifties, Atlantic moved from the Hotel
Jefferson to offices at 301 West 54th St and then to 356 West 56th St.

Atlantic's first recordings were issued in late January 1948 and included
"That Old Black Magic" by Tiny Grimes and "The Spider" by Joe Morris.[12] In
its early years, Atlantic concentrated on modern jazz[10][13][14] although it
released some country and western and spoken word recordings. Abramson also
produced "Magic Records", children's records with four grooves on each side,
each groove containing a different story, so the story played would be
determined by the groove in which the stylus happened to land.[15]

In late 1947, James Petrillo, head of the American Federation of Musicians,
announced an indefinite ban on all recording activities by union musicians,
and this came into effect on January 1, 1948. The union action forced Atlantic
to use almost all its capital to cut and stockpile enough recordings to last
through the ban, which was expected to continue for at least a year.[13]

Ertegun and Abramson spent much of the late 1940s and early 1950s scouring
nightclubs in search of talent. Ertegun composed songs under the alias "A.
Nugetre", including Big Joe Turner's hit "Chains of Love", recording them in
booths in Times Square, then giving them to an arranger or session
musician.[16] Early releases included music by Sidney Bechet, Barney Bigard,
The Cardinals, The Clovers, Frank Culley, The Delta Rhythm Boys, Erroll
Garner, Dizzy Gillespie, Tiny Grimes, Al Hibbler, Earl Hines, Johnny Hodges,
Jackie & Roy, Lead Belly, Meade Lux Lewis, Professor Longhair, Shelly Manne,
Howard McGhee, Mabel Mercer, James Moody, Joe Morris, Art Pepper, Django
Reinhardt, Pete Rugolo, Pee Wee Russell, Bobby Short, Sylvia Syms, Billy
Taylor, Sonny Terry, Big Joe Turner, Jimmy Yancey, Sarah Vaughan, Mal Waldron,
and Mary Lou Williams.[4]

In early 1949, a New Orleans distributor phoned Ertegun to obtain Stick
McGhee's "Drinking Wine, Spo-Dee-O-Dee", which was unavailable due to the
closing of McGhee's previous label. Ertegun knew Stick's younger brother
Brownie McGhee, with whom Stick happened to be staying, so he contacted the
McGhee brothers and re-recorded the song. When released in February 1949,[4]
it became Atlantic's first hit, selling 400,000 copies, and reached No. 2
after spending almost six months on the _Billboard_ R&B chart – although
McGhee himself earned just $10 for the session.[17] Atlantic's fortunes rose
rapidly: recorded 187 songs were recorded in 1949, more than three times the
amount from the previous two years, and received overtures for a manufacturing
and distribution deal with Columbia, which would pay Atlantic a 3% royalty on
every copy sold. Ertegun asked about artists' royalties, which he paid, and
this surprised Columbia executives, who did not, and the deal was
scuttled.[18]

On the recommendation of broadcaster Willis Conover, Ertegun and Abramson
visited Ruth Brown at the Crystal Caverns club in Washington and invited her
to audition for Atlantic. She was injured in a car accident en route to New
York City, but Atlantic supported her for nine months and then signed her. "So
Long", her first record for the label, was recorded with Eddie Condon's band
on May 25, 1949.[19] The song reached No. 6 on the R&B chart. Brown recorded
more than eighty songs for Atlantic, becoming its bestselling, most prolific
musician of the period. So significant was Brown's success to Atlantic that
the label became known colloquially as "The House That Ruth Built".[20]

Joe Morris, one of the label's earliest signings, scored a hit with his
October 1950 song "Anytime, Anyplace, Anywhere", the first Atlantic record
issued in 45rpm format, which the company began pressing in January 1951. The
Clovers' "Don't You Know I Love You" (composed by Ertegun) became the label's
first R&B No. 1 in September 1951. A few weeks later Brown's "Teardrops from
My Eyes" became its first million-selling record.[21] She hit No. 1 again in
March–April 1952 with "5-10-15 Hours".[4][19] "Daddy Daddy" reached No. 3 in
September 1952, and "Mama, He Treats Your Daughter Mean" with Connie Kay on
drums reached No. 1 in February and March 1953.[19] After Brown left the label
in 1961, her career declined, and within she worked as a cleaner and bus
driver to support her children. In the 1980s she sued Atlantic for unpaid
royalties; although Atlantic, which prided itself on treating artists fairly,
had stopped paying royalties to some musicians. Ertegun denied this was
intentional. Brown received a voluntary payment of $20,000 and founded the
Rhythm and Blues Foundation in 1988 with a donation of $1.5 million from
Ertegun.[21]

In 1952 Atlantic signed Ray Charles, whose hits included "I Got a Woman",
"What'd I Say", and "Hallelujah I Love Her So". Later that year The Clovers'
"One Mint Julep" reached No. 2. In 1953, after learning that singer Clyde
McPhatter had been fired from Billy Ward and His Dominoes and was forming The
Drifters, Ertegun signed the group. Their single "Money Honey" became the
biggest R&B hit of the year.[22] Their records created some controversy: the
suggestive "Such A Night" was banned by radio station WXYZ in Detroit,
Michigan and "Honey Love" was banned in Memphis, Tennessee[23] but both
reached No. 1 on the _Billboard_ R&B chart.[19]

Recording engineer and producer Tom Dowd played a crucial role in Atlantic's
success. He initially worked for Atlantic on a freelance basis, but within a
few years he had been hired as the label's full-time staff engineer. His
recordings for Atlantic and Stax influenced pop music. He had more hits than
George Martin and Phil Spector combined.[24][25]

Atlantic was one of the first independent labels to make recordings in stereo:
Dowd used a portable stereo recorder which ran simultaneously with the
studio's existing mono recorder. In 1953 (according to _Billboard_ ) Atlantic
was the first label to issue commercial LPs recorded in the experimental
stereo system called binaural recording.[26] In this system, recordings were
made using two microphones, spaced at approximately the distance between the
human ears, and the left and right channels were recorded as two separate,
parallel grooves. Playing them back required a turntable with a special tone-
arm fitted with dual needles; it was not until around 1958 that the single
stylus microgroove system (in which the two stereo channels were cut into
either side of a single groove) became the industry standard.[27] By the late
1950s stereo LPs and turntables being introduced. Atlantic's early stereo
recordings included "Lover's Question" by Clyde McPhatter, "What Am I Living
For" by Chuck Willis, "I Cried a Tear" by LaVern Baker, "Splish Splash" by
Bobby Darin, "Yakety Yak" by the Coasters and "What'd I Say" by Ray Charles.
Although these were primarily 45rpm mono singles for much of the 1950s Dowd
stockpiled his "parallel" stereo takes for future release. In 1968 the label
issued _History of Rhythm and Blues, Volume 4_ in stereo. Stereo versions of
Ray Charles "What'd I Say" and "Night Time is the Right Time" were included on
the Atlantic anthology _The Birth of Soul: The Complete Atlantic Rhythm &
Blues Recordings, 1952–1959_.[4]

Atlantic's New York studio was the first in America to install multitrack
recording machines, developed by the Ampex company. Bobby Darin's "Splish,
Splash" was the first song to be recorded on 8-track recorder. It was not
until the mid-1960s that multitrack recorders became the norm in English
studios and EMI's Abbey Road Studios did not install 8-track facilities until
1968.[28]

Atlantic entered the LP market early: its first was _This Is My Beloved_
(March 1949), a 10" album of poetry by Walter Benton that was narrated by John
Dall with music by Vernon Duke.[29] In 1951, Atlantic was one of the first
independent labels to press records in the 45rpm single format. By 1956 the 45
had surpassed the 78 in sales for singles. In April of that year, Miriam
(Abramson) Bienstock reported to _Billboard_ that Atlantic was selling 75% of
its singles as 45s. During the previous year, 78s had outsold 45s by a ratio
of two to one.[30]

In February 1953, Herb Abramson was drafted into the U.S. Army.[31] He moved
to Germany, where he served in the Army Dental Corps,[30] although he retained
his post as president of Atlantic on full pay.[4] Ertegun hired _Billboard_
reporter Jerry Wexler in June 1953.[30] Wexler is credited with coining the
term "rhythm & blues" to replace "race music".[32] He was appointed vice-
president and purchased 13% of the company's stock.[4] Wexler and Ertegun
formed a close partnership which, in collaboration with Tom Dowd, produced
thirty R&B hits.

Wexler's success for Atlantic was the result of going outside jazz to sign
acts who combined jazz, blues, and rhythm and blues, such as Ray Charles, Joe
Turner, and Aretha Franklin.[31] Ertegun and Wexler realized many R&B
recordings by black musicians were being covered by white performers, often
with greater chart success.[33] LaVern Baker had a No. 4 R&B hit with
"Tweedlee Dee", but a rival version by Georgia Gibbs went to No. 2 on the pop
chart. Big Joe Turner's April 1954 song "Shake, Rattle and Roll" was a No. 1
R&B hit, but it only reached No. 22 on the pop chart. Bill Haley & His
Comets's version reached No. 7, selling over one million copies and becoming
the bestselling song of the year for Decca. In July 1954, Wexler and Ertegun
wrote a prescient article for _Cash Box_ devoted to what they called "cat
music"; the same month, Atlantic had its first major "crossover" hit on the
_Billboard_ pop chart when the "Sh-Boom" by The Chords reached No. 5[30]
(although The Crew-Cuts' version went to No. 1). Atlantic missed an important
signing in 1955 when Sun owner Sam Phillips sold Elvis Presley's recording
contract in a bidding war between labels. Atlantic offered $25,000 which,
Ertegun later noted, "was all the money we had then."[34] But they were outbid
by RCA's offer of $45,000. In 1990 Ertegun remarked, "The president of RCA at
the time had been extensively quoted in _Variety_ damning R&B music as
immoral. He soon stopped when RCA signed Elvis Presley."[34]

Ahmet's older brother Nesuhi was hired in January 1955.[26] He had been living
in Los Angeles for several years and had intermittent contact with his younger
brother. But when Ahmet learned that Nesuhi had been offered a partnership in
Atlantic's rival Imperial Records, he and Wexler convinced Nesuhi to join
Atlantic instead.[35] Nesuhi became head of artists and repertoire (A&R),[31]
led the label's jazz division, and built a roster that included Shorty Rogers,
Jimmy Giuffre, Herbie Mann, Les McCann,[4] Charles Mingus, and John
Coltrane.[36] By 1958 Atlantic was America's second-largest independent jazz
label.[26]

Nesuhi was also in charge of LP production. He was credited with improving the
production, packaging, and originality of Atlantic's LPs.[26] He deleted the
old '100' and '400' series of 10" albums and the earlier 12" albums in
Atlantic's catalog, starting the '1200' series, which sold for $4.98, with
Shorty Rogers' _The Swingin' Mr Rogers_.[37] In 1956 he started the '8000'
popular series (selling for $3.98) for the label's few R&B albums, reserving
the 1200 series for jazz.[4] Joel Dorn became Nesuhi's assistant after his
successful production of Hubert Laws' album _The Laws of Jazz_.[38][39]

When Abramson returned from military service in 1955, he realized that he had
been replaced by Wexler as Ahmet's partner. Abramson did not get along with
either Wexler or Nesuhi Ertegun, and he had returned from military service
with a German girlfriend, which precipitated his divorce from Miriam, a minor
stockholder and Atlantic's business and publishing manager.

By 1958, relations between Abramson and his partners had broken down; in
December 1958 a $300,000 buy-out was arranged; his stock was split between
Nesuhi Ertegun and Abramson's ex-wife Miriam, who had in the meantime
remarried to music publisher Freddy Bienstock (later the owner of the Carlin
Music / Chappell Music publishing empire). Abramson's departure opened the way
for Ahmet Ertegun to take over as president of the label.[40] The roles of the
other executives with Abramson's departure were Wexler as executive vice-
president and general manager, Nesuhi Ertegun as executive vice-president in
charge of the LP department and Miriam Bienstock as vice-president and also
president of Atlantic's music publishing arm Progressive Music with Wexler as
executive vice-president and the Ertegun brothers vice-president of
Progressive.[41]

Atlantic played a major role in popularizing the genre that Jerry Wexler
dubbed rhythm & blues, and it profited handsomely. The market for these
records exploded during late 1953 and early 1954 as R&B hits crossed over to
the mainstream (i.e. white) audience. In its tenth anniversary feature on
Atlantic, _Billboard_ noted, "... a very big R&B record might achieve 250,000
sales, but from this point on (1953–54), the industry began to see million
sellers, one after the other, in the R&B field".[26] _Billboard_ said
Atlantic's "fresh sound" and the quality of its recordings, arrangements, and
musicians was a great advance from standard R&B records. For five years
Atlantic "dominated the rhythm and blues chart with its roster of powerhouse
artists".[26]

Beginning in 1954, Atlantic created or acquired several subsidiary labels, the
first being Cat Records. By the mid-1950s Atlantic had an informal agreement
with the French label Barclay, and the two companies regularly exchanged
titles, usually jazz recordings. Atlantic also began to get recordings
distributed in the United Kingdom, first through EMI on a 'one-off' basis. But
in September 1955 Miriam Abramson traveled to the UK and signed a distribution
deal with Decca.[42] Miriam recalled, "I would deal with people there who were
not really comfortable with women in business, so...we would do business very
quickly and get it over with."[43]

A subsidiary label, Atco, was established in 1955 to keep Abramson
involved.[44] After a slow start, Atco had considerable success with Bobby
Darin. His early releases were unsuccessful, and Abramson planned to drop him.
But when Ertegun offered him another chance, the result was "Splish Splash",
which Darin had written in 12 minutes. The song sold 100,000 copies in the
first month and became a million-seller. "Queen of the Hop" made the Top 10 on
both the US pop and R&B charts and charted in the UK. "Dream Lover" reached
No. 2 in the US and No. 1 in the UK and became a multi-million seller. "Mack
the Knife" (1959) went to No. 1 in both the US and the UK, sold over 2 million
copies, and won the 1960 Grammy Award for Record of the Year. "Beyond the Sea"
became Darin's fourth consecutive Top 10 hit in the US and UK. He signed with
Capitol and moved for Hollywood to attempt a movie career, but hits such as
"You Must Have Been a Beautiful Baby" and "Things" continued to benefit Atco
through 1962. Darin returned to Atlantic in 1965.[45]

Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller wrote "Smokey Joe's Cafe", which became a hit
for The Robins. Their label Spark was bought by Atlantic, and they were hired
as America's first independent record producers, free to produce for other
labels. Two members of The Robins formed The Coasters and recorded hits for
Atlantic, such as "Down in Mexico" and "Young Blood". "Yakety Yak" became
Atlantic's first No. 1 pop hit. Leiber and Stoller also wrote the hit "Ruby
Baby" for The Drifters.[4][46]

Record producer Phil Spector moved to New York to work with Leiber and
Stoller. He learned his trade at Trey Records, a label in California owned by
Lester Sill and Lee Hazlewood and distributed by Atlantic. Sill recommended
Spector to Leiber and Stoller, who assigned him to produce "Corrine, Corrina"
by Ray Peterson and "Pretty Little Angel Eyes" by Curtis Lee. Both became
hits, and Atlantic hired him as a staff producer. Ahmet Ertegun liked him, but
Leiber said, "He wasn't likable. He was funny, he was amusing—but he wasn't
nice." Wexler disliked him. Miriam Bienstock called him "a pain in the
neck".[47] When Spector criticized Bobby Darin's songwriting, Darin had him
thrown out of the house.[48]

Atlantic tolerated Spector but with diminishing returns. He produced "Twist
and Shout" for The Top Notes, and it flopped. Songwriter Bert Berns hated
Spector's arrangement and thought it ruined the song, so Berns re-recorded it
with The Isley Brothers and it became a hit. During his short time at
Atlantic, Spector produced music for LaVern Baker, Ruth Brown, Jean DuShon,
and Billy Storm. In 1961, he left the label, returned to Los Angeles, and
founded Philles Records with Lester Sill. Spector became one of the most
successful record producers of the 1960s.[4]

Although Leiber and Stoller wrote many popular songs for Atlantic, their
relationship with the label was deteriorating in 1962. The breaking point came
when they asked for a producer's royalty. It was granted informally, but their
accountant insisted on a written contract and an audit of Atlantic's accounts.
The audit revealed Leiber and Stoller had been underpaid by $18,000. Although
Leiber considered dropping the matter, Stoller pressed Atlantic for payment.
Wexler exploded and replied the payment would mean the end of their
relationship with the label. Leiber and Stoller backed down, but the
relationship ended anyway. Their assignment to work on The Drifter's next
recording was given to Phil Spector.[49]

Leiber and Stoller worked briefly for United Artists, then started Red Bird
with George Goldner. They had hits with "Chapel of Love" by The Dixie Cups and
"Leader of the Pack" by The Shangri-Las, but Red Bird's finances were
precarious. In 1964 they approached Jerry Wexler and proposed a merger with
Atlantic. When interviewed in 1990 for Ertegun's biography, Wexler declined to
discuss the matter, but Ertegun claimed these negotiations were a plan to buy
him out. In September 1964, the Ertegun brothers and Wexler were in the
process of buying out the company's other two shareholders, Sabit and
Bienstock,[50] and it was proposed that Leiber and Stoller buy Sabit's shares.
Leiber, Stoller, Goldner, and Wexler suggested their plan to Ertegun at a
lunch meeting at the Plaza Hotel in New York. Leiber and Stoller told Ertegun
they had no intention of buying him out, but Ertegun was aggravated by
Goldner's attitude and was convinced Wexler was conspiring with them. Wexler
told Ertegun if he refused, the deal would be done without him. But the
Ertegun brothers held the majority of stock while Wexler controlled about 20
percent. Ertegun started lifelong grudges against Leiber and Stoller, and his
relationship with Wexler was damaged.[51]

Atlantic was doing so well in early 1959 that some scheduled releases were
held back, and the company enjoyed two successive months of gross sales of
over $1 million that summer, thanks to hits by The Coasters, The Drifters,
LaVern Baker, Ray Charles, Bobby Darin, and Clyde McPhatter.[52] Months later
the company was reeling from the successive loss of its two biggest artists,
Bobby Darin and Ray Charles, who together accounted for one third of sales.
Darin moved to Los Angeles and signed with Capitol. Charles signed a contract
with ABC-Paramount that included higher royalties, a production deal, profit-
sharing, and eventual ownership of his master tapes. "I thought we were going
to die", Wexler recalled. In 1990 he and Ertegun disputed the content of
Charles's contract, which caused a rift. Ertegun remained friendly with Bobby
Darin, who returned to Atlantic in 1966.[53] Ray Charles returned to Atlantic
in 1977.[54]

In 1960, Atlantic's Memphis distributor Buster Williams contacted Wexler and
told him he was pressing large quantities of "Cause I Love You", a duet
between Carla Thomas and her father Rufus which was released by the small
label Satellite. Wexler contacted the co-owner of Satellite, Jim Stewart, who
agreed to lease the record to Atlantic for $1000 plus a small royalty—the
first money the label had ever made.[55] The deal included a $5000 payment
against a five-year option on all other records. Satellite was renamed Stax
after the owners, Stewart and Axton.[56] The deal marked the start of a
successful eight-year association between the two labels, giving Stax access
to Atlantic's promotions and distribution. Wexler recalled, "We didn't pay for
the masters...Jim paid for the masters and then he would send us a finished
tape and we would put it out. Our costs began at the production level—the
pressing, and distribution, and promotion, and advertising."[57]

The deal to distribute Satellite's "Last Night" by The Mar-Keys on the
Satellite label marked the first time Atlantic began marketing outside tracks
on a non-Atlantic label.[58]

Atlantic began pressing and distributing Stax records. Wexler sent Tom Dowd to
upgrade Stax's recording equipment and facilities. Wexler was impressed by the
cooperative atmosphere at the Stax studios and by its racially integrated
house band, which he called "an unthinkably great band".[59] He brought
Atlantic musicians to Memphis to record.[4] Stewart and Wexler hired Al Bell,
a disk jockey at a radio station in Washington D.C., to take over promotion of
Stax releases. Bell was the first African-American partner in the label.[57]

An after-hours jam by members of the Stax house band resulted in "Green
Onions". The single was issued in August 1962 and became the biggest
instrumental hit of the year, reaching No. 1 on the R&B chart and No. 3 on the
pop chart, selling over one million copies. Over the next five years Stax and
its subsidiary Volt provided Atlantic with many hits, such as "Respect" by
Otis Redding, "Knock on Wood" by Eddie Floyd, "Hold On, I'm Comin'" by Sam and
Dave, and "Mustang Sally" by Wilson Pickett.

Aretha Franklin signed with Atlantic in 1966 after her contract with Columbia
expired. Columbia tried to market her as a jazz singer. Jerry Wexler said,
"we're gonna put her back in church."[19] She rose to fame quickly and was
called the Queen of Soul. Wexler oversaw production himself at Fame Studios in
Muscle Shoals, Alabama. The result was seven consecutive singles that made
both the US Pop and Soul Top 10: "I Never Loved a Man (The Way I Love You)"
(Soul No. 1, Pop No. 9), "Respect" (Soul and Pop No. 1), "Baby, I Love You"
(Soul No. 1, Pop No. 4), "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman" (Soul No.
2, Pop No. 8), "Chain of Fools" (Soul No. 1, Pop No. 2), "Since You've Been
Gone" (Soul No. 1, Pop No. 5), and "Think" (Soul No. 1, Pop No. 7).

In late 1961 singer Solomon Burke arrived at Jerry Wexler's office
unannounced. Wexler was a fan of Burke's and had long wanted to sign him so
when Burke told Wexler his contract with his former label had expired Wexler
replied: "You're home. I'm signing you today". The first song Wexler produced
with Burke was "Just Out of Reach", which became a big hit in September 1961.
The soul/country & western crossover predated Ray Charles' similar venture by
more than 6 months. Burke became a consistent big seller through the mid-1960s
and scored hits on Atlantic into 1968. In 1962 folk music was booming and the
label came very close to signing Peter, Paul & Mary; although Wexler and
Ertegun pursued them vigorously the deal fell through at the last minute and
they later discovered music publisher Artie Mogull had introduced their
manager Albert Grossman to Warner Bros. executive Herman Starr, who had made
the trio an irresistible offer that gave them complete creative control over
the recording and packaging of their music.[60]

The mid-1960s British Invasion led Atlantic to change its British distributor.
Decca had refused access to its British acts, who usually appeared in the US
on the London subsidiary. In 1966 Atlantic signed a licensing deal with
Polydor which included the band Cream, whose debut album was released by Atco
in 1966. In 1967 the group traveled to Atlantic's studio in New York City to
record _Disraeli Gears_ with Tom Dowd; it became a Top 5 LP in both the US and
the UK, with the single "Sunshine of Your Love" reaching No. 5 on the
_Billboard_ Hot 100. Wexler dismissed developments in pop music, dubbing the
musicians "the rockoids".[61] But Atlantic profited from moving into rock
music in the 1970s when it signed Bad Company, Led Zeppelin, and Yes.

Despite the huge success Atlantic was enjoying with its own artists and
through its deal with Stax, by 1967 Jerry Wexler was seriously concerned about
the disintegration of the old order of independent record companies and,
fearing for the label's future, he began agitating for it to be sold to a
larger company. Label President Ahmet Ertegun still had no desire to sell, but
the balance of power had changed since the abortive takeover attempt of 1962;
Atlantic's original investor Dr Vahdi Sabit and minority stockholder Miriam
Bienstock had both been bought out in September 1964[50] and the other
remaining partner, Nesuhi Ertegun, was eventually convinced to side with
Wexler. Since they jointly held more stock, Ahmet was obliged to agree to the
sale.

In October 1967 Atlantic was sold to Warner Bros.-Seven Arts for US$17.5
million, although all the partners later agreed that it was a poor deal which
greatly undervalued Atlantic's true worth. Initially, Atlantic and Atco
operated entirely separately from the group's other labels, Warner Bros.
Records and Reprise Records, and management did not interfere with the music
division, since the ailing movie division was losing money, while the Warner
recording division was booming – by mid-1968 Warner's recording and publishing
interests were generating 74% of the group's total profits.[62][63]

The sale of Atlantic Records activated a clause in the distribution agreement
with Stax Records calling for renegotiation of the distribution deal and at
this point the Stax partners discovered that the deal gave Atlantic ownership
of all the Stax recordings Atlantic distributed. The new Warner owners refused
to relinquish ownership of the Stax masters, so the distribution deal ended on
May 1968.[64] Atlantic continues to hold the rights to Stax recordings it
distributed in the 1960s.

In the wake of the takeover, Jerry Wexler's influence in the company rapidly
diminished; by his own admission, he and Ertegun had run Atlantic as "utmost
despots" but in the new corporate structure, he found himself unwilling to
accept the delegation of responsibility that his executive role dictated. He
was also alienated from the "rockoid" white acts that were quickly becoming
the label's most profitable commodities, and dispirited by the rapidly waning
fortunes of the black acts he had championed, such as Ben E. King and Solomon
Burke. Wexler ultimately decided to leave New York and move to Florida.
Following his departure, Ertegun—who had previously taken little interest in
Atlantic's business affairs—took decisive control of the label[65] and quickly
became a major force in the expanding Warner music group.

During 1968 Atlantic established a new subsidiary label, Cotillion Records.
The label was originally formed as an outlet for blues and deep Southern soul;
its first single, Otis Clay's version of "She's About A Mover", was an R&B
hit. Cotillion's catalog quickly expanded to include progressive rock, folk-
rock, gospel, jazz and comedy. In 1976, the label started focusing on disco
and R&B. Among its acts were the post-Curtis Mayfield Impressions, Slave,
Brook Benton, Jean Knight, Mass Production, Sister Sledge, The Velvet
Underground, Stacy Lattisaw, Lou Donaldson, Mylon LeFevre, Stevie Woods,
Johnny Gill, Emerson, Lake & Palmer, Garland Green, The Dynamics, The Fabulous
Counts, and The Fatback Band. Cotillion was also responsible for launching the
career of Luther Vandross, who recorded for the label as part of the trio
Luther. Cotillion also released the triple-albums soundtrack of the Woodstock
festival film in 1970. From 1970 it also distributed Embryo Records, founded
by jazz flautist Herbie Mann after his earlier Atlantic contract had expired.

In addition to establishing Cotillion, Atlantic began expanding its own roster
to include rock, soul/rock, progressive rock, British bands and singer
songwriters. Two female artists were personally signed by Wexler, with album
releases in 1969, Dusty Springfield ( _Dusty in Memphis_ )[66] and Lotti
Golden ( _Motor-Cycle_ ),[67] although Golden also had a close working
relationship with Ertegun, who was instrumental in her signing with the
label.[68] By 1969, the Atlantic 8000 series (1968–72) consisted of R&B, rock,
soul/rock and psychedelic acts.[69] Other releases that year include albums by
Aretha Franklin ( _Soul '69_ ), Led Zeppelin ( _Led Zeppelin_ ), Don Covay (
_House of Blue Lights_ ), Boz Scaggs ( _Boz Scaggs_ ), Roberta Flack ( _First
Take_ ), Wilson Pickett ( _Hey Jude_ ), Mott the Hoople ( _Mott the Hoople_ ),
and Black Pearl ( _Black Pearl_ ).[69]

In 1969 Warner Bros.-Seven Arts was taken over by the Kinney National Company,
and in the early 1970s the group was rebadged as Warner Communications. After
buying Elektra Records and its sister label Nonesuch Records in 1970, Kinney
combined the operations of all of its record labels under a new holding
company, WEA, and also known as Warner Music Group. WEA was also used as a
label for distributing the company's artists outside North America. In January
1970, Ahmet Ertegun was successful in his executive battle against Warner
Bros. Records President Mike Maitland to keep Atlantic Records autonomous and
as a result Maitland was fired by Kinney president Steve Ross. Ertegun
recommended Mo Ostin to succeed Maitland as Warner Bros. Records
president.[70][ _page needed_ ] With Ertegun's power at Warners now secure,
Atlantic was able to maintain autonomy through the parent company
reorganizations and continue to do their own marketing, while WEA handled
distribution.

Some acts on the Atlantic roster in this period were British (including Led
Zeppelin, Genesis, Yes, Bad Company and Phil Collins) and this was largely due
to Ertegun. According to Greenberg, Ertegun had long seen the UK as a source
of untapped talent. At his urging, Greenberg visited the UK six or seven times
every year in search of acts to sign to the label.[71]

For much of its early history, Jerry Wexler had been managers of the
label,[72] while Ertegun had concentrated on A&R and had less interest in the
business side. But that changed after the sale to Warner. Although Ertegun had
been forced into accepting the sale, he turned the situation to his advantage.
He gained executive control of the label and influenced the Warner group. By
contrast, Wexler was disenchanted by Atlantic's move into rock; he left in
1975. Wexler's protégé Jerry L. Greenberg replaced him and played a role in
Atlantic's success during the 1970s.

In seven years, Greenberg went from personal assistant to president of the
label. Wexler had hired Greenberg and acted as his mentor, teaching him the
daily operations of the record business. From Ertegun he learned how to treat
musicians.[72]

In 1968 Peter Grant flew to New York with tapes of the debut album by British
rock band Led Zeppelin. Ertegun and Wexler knew of the group's leader, Jimmy
Page, through The Yardbirds, and their favorable opinion was reinforced by
Dusty Springfield, who recommended Atlantic sign the band. Atlantic signed the
band to an exclusive five-year contract, one of the "most substantial" in the
label's history[73] Zeppelin recorded for Atlantic from 1968 to 1973. After
the contract expired, they founded their label Swan Song and signed a
distribution deal with Atlantic after being turned down by other labels.

In 1969 Stephen Stills was still signed to Atlantic under the contract dating
from time with in Buffalo Springfield. His agent David Geffen went to Wexler
to ask for Stills to be released from his Atlantic contract, because Geffen
wanted Stills' new group to sign with Columbia. Wexler lost his temper and
threw Geffen out of his office, but Geffen called Ahmet Ertegun the next day,
and Ertegun persuaded Geffen to convince Clive Davis at Columbia to let
Atlantic sign Crosby, Stills & Nash.[4]

The trio was formed following a chance meeting between members of three
leading 1960s pop groups – Stephen Stills, David Crosby of The Byrds and
Graham Nash of The Hollies. Stills and Crosby had been friends since the early
1960s; Nash had first met Crosby in the mid-1960s when The Byrds toured the
UK, and he renewed the friendship when The Hollies toured the US in mid-1968.
By this time creative tensions within The Hollies were coming to a head, and
Nash had already decided to leave the group. Fate intervened during the
Hollies US tour, when Nash reunited with Crosby and met Stephen Stills (ex-
Buffalo Springfield) at a party at the Los Angeles home of Cass Elliott in
July 1968. After Crosby and Stills sang Stills' new composition "You Don't
Have To Cry" that evening, Nash asked them to repeat it, and chimed in with an
impromptu third harmony part. The trio's unique vocal chemistry was instantly
apparent, so when Nash quit the Hollies in August 1968 and relocated to Los
Angeles, the three immediately formed a trio, Crosby, Stills & Nash. After
surprisingly failing their audition for Apple Records, thanks to Ertegun's
intervention and intense negotiations with David Geffen, who represented
Crosby and Nash, as well as Stills,[74] they ultimately signed with Atlantic,
who gave them virtually complete freedom to record their first album. The
signing was complicated by the fact that Nash was still under contract to Epic
Records (The Hollies' US distributor), but Ertegun used his diplomatic prowess
to overcome this by arranging a 'swap' – he released former Buffalo
Springfield member Richie Furay from his Atlantic contract, allowing Furay's
new group Poco to sign to Epic, and in exchange Columbia Records (the parent
company of Epic) allowed Nash to sign to Atlantic. In the event, Ertegun and
Atlantic were the clear winners. Poco achieved moderate success for Epic, but
Crosby, Stills & Nash's self-titled debut album (released in May 1969) became
a huge and enduring hit, reaching #6 on the _Billboard_ album chart, spawning
two US Top 40 singles, becoming a multi-platinum seller and eventually earning
a place in the _Rolling Stone_ list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.

Hot on the heels of the huge success of CSNY and Led Zeppelin, British band
Yes rapidly established themselves as one of the leading groups in the
burgeoning progressive rock genre, and their success also played a significant
part in establishing the primacy of the long-playing album as the major sales
format for rock music in the 1970s. After several lineup changes during
1969–70, the band settled into its "classic" incarnation, with guitarist Steve
Howe and keyboard player Rick Wakeman, who both joined during 1971. Although
the extended length of much of their material made it somewhat difficult to
promote the band with single releases, their live prowess gained them an avid
following and their albums were hugely successful – their third LP _The Yes
Album_ (1971), which featured the debut of new guitarist Steve Howe, became
their first big hit, reaching #4 in the UK and just scraping onto the chart in
the US at #40. From this point, and notwithstanding the impact of the punk/new
wave movement in the late 1970s, the band enjoyed an extraordinary run of
success—beginning with their fourth album _Fragile_ , each of the eleven
albums they released between 1971 and 1991 (including the lavishly packaged
live triple-album _Yessongs_ ) made the Top 20 in the US and the UK, and the
double-LP _Tales of Topographic Oceans_ (1973) and _Going For The One_ (1977)
both reached #1 in the UK.

Much of Atlantic's renewed success as a rock label in the late 1970s can be
attributed to the efforts of renowned A&R manager John Kalodner. In 1974 the
former photographer, record store manager and music critic joined Atlantic's
New York publicity department. In 1975 Kalodner moved to the A&R department,
rose rapidly through the ranks, and in 1976 he was promoted to become
Atlantic's first West Coast director of A&R. Over the next four years he was
instrumental in signing a string of major acts including Foreigner, AC/DC,
Peter Gabriel and Phil Collins. Kalodner built his reputation by signing acts
that other labels had turned down, and perhaps the most significant example of
his achievements in this area was his championing of Anglo-American band
Foreigner.

The group was the brainchild of expatriate British musicians Mick Jones (ex
Spooky Tooth) and Ian McDonald, one of the founding members of King Crimson.
The demo tapes of the songs that eventually became their debut album
(including the song "Feels Like The First Time") were famously rejected by
almost every major label, including Atlantic – although their tenacious
manager Bud Prager later revealed that, in retaliation for a previous bad
deal, he deliberately didn't approach CBS ("They had screwed me out of a lot
of money, so I figured I would screw them out of Foreigner. The band was never
even offered to them.")[75] Prager persisted with Atlantic, even though their
A&R department and label President Jerry Greenberg repeatedly rejected
Foreigner; it was Kalodner's dogged belief in the group (and a live audition)
that finally convinced Greenberg to allow Kalodner to sign them and take them
on as his personal project. Even then, Kalodner was turned down by twenty-six
producers before he found someone willing to take on the project. Despite all
the resistance, Kalodner's belief in Foreigner was totally vindicated by the
group's massive success – their 1976 debut single "Feels LIke The First Time"
reached #4 on the Billboard singles chart, their self-titled debut album sold
more than 4 million copies, and the subsequent singles from the album kept the
group in the US charts continuously for more than a year. In the years that
followed, Foreigner became one of Atlantic's biggest successes, and one of the
biggest-selling groups in history, scoring a string of international hits and
selling more than 80 million albums worldwide, including 37.5 million albums
in the US alone.

In 1978, Atlantic finally broke the leading UK progressive group Genesis as a
major act in the US. Ahmet Ertegun had first seen them perform in the Midwest
on one of their early American tours, and it was on this occasion that he also
became an ardent fan of their drummer/vocalist, Phil Collins. Jerry Greenberg
signed the group to Atlantic in the US in 1973 on Ertegun's advice, but
although they were very successful in Europe, Genesis remained at best a
"cult" act in America for most of the Seventies. In the meantime, original
lead singer Peter Gabriel had left the group in 1975, followed in 1977 by lead
guitarist Steve Hackett, reducing the group to a three-piece. Ertegun was
directly involved in the recording of the band's 1978 album _...And Then There
Were Three..._ , personally remixing the album's projected first single
"Follow You, Follow Me". Although the group didn't use this version, it guided
them in their subsequent production. Collins later commented, "We didn't use
his version, but we knew what he was getting at. He saw something more in
there that wasn't coming out before."[76] The released version of "Follow You,
Follow Me" gave Genesis their first hit single in the US, the album became
their first American gold record, and the experience resulted in Ertegun and
Collins becoming close friends.

By 1979 Genesis drummer/singer Phil Collins was considering branching out into
a solo career. Reacting to the acrimonious breakup of his first marriage, he
had begun writing and recording new songs at home, which were considerably
different from the material he had been recording with Genesis. Although many
in the industry reportedly discouraged him from going solo,[77] Collins was
strongly supported by Ertegun, who encouraged him to record an album after
hearing the R&B-flavoured demo tapes Collins had recorded in his garage.
Ertegun also insisted on changes to the song that became Collins' debut
single. After hearing the song's sparsely-arranged opening section, Ertegun
said: "Where's the backbeat, man? The kids won't know where it is – you've got
to put extra drums on it." Collins replied "The drums come later," to which
Ertegun retorted "By that time the kids will have switched over to another
radio station." Acceding to Ertegun's demand, Collins took the unusual step of
overdubbing extra drums on the finished master tape, and he later commented,
"He (Ertegun) was quite right."[78]

Although his close friendship with Ertegun helped Collins launch his solo
career, the fact that he eventually signed to Atlantic in the US was
apparently as much by luck as by design. By early 1980, when Collins was
recording his solo album, the record industry was suffering greatly from the
impact of the worldwide economic recession, and many labels were beginning to
cull their rosters and drop acts that weren't providing major returns. At this
same time, Genesis' contract with Atlantic was up for renewal, and Collins was
yet to sign as a solo artist. As part of the negotiations, Collins and his
bandmates wanted their own 'vanity' label, Duke Records, but according to
Kalodner, and despite of Ertegun's personal interest, the group's demands, and
their relatively modest performance in the US made Atlantic executives
ambivalent about the deal. Kalodner was overseeing the recording of Collins'
solo album while Atlantic were vacillating about signing the band and Collins,
but it was at this point that Kalodner was abruptly dismissed from Atlantic,
although he was almost immediately recruited to head the A&R division at the
newly formed Geffen Records. Angered by his unceremonious ejection from
Atlantic, he alerted Geffen to Collins' availability, but to his chagrin,
neither Geffen nor any other US label showed interest; He then alerted Virgin
Records boss Richard Branson, who immediately contacted Collins' manager Tony
Stratton Smith and signed Collins to Virgin in the UK as a solo act.[79]

Although Ertegun subsequently disputed Kalodner's account of the
Genesis/Collins contract saga, he agreed that the loss of Gabriel was a big
mistake, and his regret about his handling of the matter was only compounded
by Gabriel's subsequent success with Geffen. Much of this was due to Kalodner,
who later admitted that, as soon as Gabriel was dropped from Atlantic, he
realised he had made a mistake. In order to make amends to Gabriel, he alerted
both CBS and Geffen to the fact that Gabriel was available, and after a
bidding war, Gabriel signed with Geffen.[80] They released his fourth solo
album (a.k.a. "Security") in 1984 to wide acclaim, and Gabriel scored a minor
US hit with the single "Shock The Monkey". Atlantic's regret was undoubtedly
heightened when Gabriel achieved huge international success with his fifth
album _So_ (1986), which reached #1 in the UK and #2 in the US and sold more
than 5 million copies in the US. The irony was further compounded by the fact
that Gabriel scored a US #1 hit with the R&B-influenced single "Sledgehammer",
which featured the legendary Memphis Horns, and which Gabriel later described
as "my chance to sing like Otis Redding."

Atlantic suffered a catastrophic loss in the early morning of February 8, 1978
when a fire destroyed most of its tape archive, which had been stored in a
non-air-conditioned warehouse in Long Branch, New Jersey.[81][82][83] The
four-story warehouse, located at 199 Broadway, was the former location of
Vogel's Department Store, before it closed down in March 1975. The building
was purchased less than a week earlier and had been scheduled to reopen as a
Nadler's Furniture Center, in an effort to revitalize the downtown area.[84]

The building was owned by the family of Sheldon Vogel, chief financial officer
of Atlantic at the time. He had recommended to move the company's multitracks
and unreleased recordings to the building after Ertegun had complained about
the aforementioned tapes taking up too much space in the company's Manhattan
offices in New York.[85]

Although master tapes of the material in Atlantic's released back catalog
survived due to being stored in New York, the fire destroyed or damaged an
estimated 5,000–6,000 reels of tape, including virtually all of the company's
unreleased master tapes, alternative takes, rehearsal tapes and session multi-
tracks recorded between 1948 and 1969. Atlantic was one of the first labels to
record in stereo; many of the tapes that were lost were stereo 'alternates'
recorded in the late 1940s and 1950s (which Atlantic routinely taped
simultaneously with the mono versions until the 1960s) as well as almost all
of the 8-track multitrack masters recorded by Tom Dowd in the 1950s and 1960s.
According to _Billboard_ journalist Bill Holland, news of the fire was kept
quiet, and one Atlantic staffer who spoke to Holland reported that he did not
find out about it until a year later. Reissue producers and archivists
subsequently located some tapes that were at first presumed 'lost', but which
had survived because they had evidently been removed from the New Jersey
archive years earlier and not returned. During the compilation of the Rhino-
Atlantic John Coltrane boxed set, producer Joel Dorn located supposedly
destroyed outtakes from Coltrane's seminal 1959 album _Giant Steps_ , plus
other tapes including Bobby Darin's original Atco demo of "Dream Lover" (with
Fred Neil playing guitar). Atlantic archivists have since rediscovered other
'lost' material including unreleased masters, alternative takes and rehearsal
tapes by Ray Charles, Van "Piano Man" Walls, Ornette Coleman, Lennie Tristano
and Lee Konitz.[81]

In May 1988, the label held a 40th Anniversary concert, broadcast on HBO. This
concert, which was almost 13 hours in length, featured performances by a large
number of their artists and included reunions of some rock legends like Led
Zeppelin and Crosby, Stills, and Nash (being David Crosby's first full band
performance since being released from prison).[86]

In 2006, the label denied "Weird Al" Yankovic permission to release "You're
Pitiful", a parody of James Blunt's "You're Beautiful", despite Blunt's own
approval of the song. Atlantic said that it was too early in Blunt's career,
and that they did not want Blunt to become a one-hit wonder.[87] Although
Yankovic could have legally gone ahead with the parody anyway under the Fair
Use doctrine, his record label, Volcano Entertainment, thought that it was
best not to "go to war" with Atlantic.[88] The parody was released onto the
Internet as a free download. Later he recorded two more parodies, "White &
Nerdy", and "Do I Creep You Out", to replace "You're Pitiful". Yankovic,
afterward, began wearing T-shirts reading "Atlantic Records sucks" while
performing live. In addition, the music video for "White & Nerdy" depicts
Yankovic defacing Atlantic's article on Wikipedia, replacing the whole page
with "YOU SUCK!" in excessively large type (which spawned copycat
vandalism).[89]

A country music division, which was founded in the 1980s, was closed in
2001.[90]

Time Warner sold Warner Music Group to a group of investors for $2.6 billion
in late 2003. The deal closed in early 2004, consolidating Elektra Records and
Atlantic into one label operated in the eastern United States.[2]

In 2007, the label celebrated its 60th anniversary with the May 2 PBS
broadcast of the _American Masters_ documentary _Atlantic Records: The House
that Ahmet Built_ and the simultaneous Starbucks CD release of _Atlantic 60th
Anniversary: R &B Classics Chosen By Ahmet Ertegun_.[91]

That year also saw Atlantic reach a milestone for major record labels.
According to the _International Herald Tribune_ , "More than half of its music
sales in the United States are now from digital products like downloads on
iTunes and ring tones for cellphones", doing so "without seeing as steep of a
decline in compact disc sales as the rest of the industry."[92]

