**Balachka** (Russian: балачка, IPA: [bɐˈlat͡ɕkə]; Ukrainian: балачка) are the
dialects of Ukrainian spoken by the Cossacks of North Caucasus, especially in
the region around the Kuban River.

The term originated from the Ukrainian term "balakaty'", which colloquially
means "to talk", "to chat".

Some linguists characterize Balachka vernacular as a dialect or group of
dialects. Balachka does not appear as a separate language on any language
codes. Nevertheless, some Cossacks consider it to be a separate language and
at least one academic case has been made in this regard.[1]

The most significant instance of the Cossack dialect is the Kuban-Black Sea
Balachka. Originally starting as a central Ukrainian dialect used by the Black
Sea Cossacks who moved to the Kuban in 1792. Over the years the language began
to acquire more Russian vocabulary, coinciding with the rising literacy rates
in the late 19th century. The Kuban Cossack Chorus artistic director Viktor
Zakharchenko points to the local folk songs dating to early and mid-19th
century.,[2] where those that originated in the Kuban would have their own
unique literary flavour and differ from those in standard Russian and
Ukrainian. During the 1897 Russian census the dialect was classified as Little
Russian (the traditional Russian name for Ukrainian) language rather than
Great Russian (Russian).

It is not known how widespread the use of _Balachka_ is. Education and strict
requirements of the Russian Academy of Sciences mean that local press such as
TV and radio adhere to standard Russian, with a notable exception for
historical films (particularly those involving Cossacks) and Folk music groups
and ensembles, such as the Kuban Cossack Chorus.[2]

As a result, there has been a gradual erosion in the use of authentic dialects
and accents, with unique terms being slowly replaced by standard Russian ones.
This is particularly noticeable in the younger generations. At the same time,
beginning in the early 1990s, the re-awakening of the Cossacks movement was
often done with rekindling of old traditions. It is thus not surprising that
many Cossacks use Balachka (or some of its elements) in their speech to
punctuate their Cossack heritage and/or affiliation.[ _citation needed_ ]

Political aspects have played a direct role in the classification of the Kuban
Balachka. Although this Balachka was initially officially classified as a
dialect of the Little Russian language (the official term in pre-revolutionary
Russia for the Ukrainian language),[3] and some Ukrainian sources actively
support the idea of Balachka being a dialect of the Ukrainian language, this
is being contested by some Russian linguistic research,[4] and some of the
Kuban Cossacks themselves, who point out that already by the 1860s there was a
separate dialect that morphed out of Ukrainian and Russian.[2]

