**Barbara Levy Boxer** (born November 11, 1940) is a retired American
politician who served as a United States senator for California from 1993 to
2017. A member of the Democratic Party, she previously served in the U.S.
House of Representatives from 1983 to 1993.

Born in Brooklyn, New York, Boxer graduated from George Wingate High School
and Brooklyn College. She worked as a stockbroker for several years before
moving to California with her husband. During the 1970s, she worked as a
journalist for the _Pacific Sun_ and as an aide to U.S. Representative John L.
Burton. She served on the Marin County Board of Supervisors for six years and
became the board's first female president. With the slogan "Barbara Boxer
Gives a Damn", she was elected to the United States House of Representatives
in 1982, representing California District 6. She sat on the House Armed
Services Committee, and was involved in government oversight, passing several
procurement reforms.

Boxer won the 1992 election for the U.S. Senate. She previously held the
record for the most votes in any U.S. Senate election in history, having
received 6.96 million votes in her 2004 re-election, until her colleague,
Dianne Feinstein, the senior senator from California, surpassed that number in
her 2012 re-election.[1] Boxer and Feinstein were the first female pair of
U.S. Senators representing any state at the same time.[2][3][4] Boxer was the
ranking member of the Environment and Public Works Committee and the vice
chair of the Select Committee on Ethics. She was also the Democratic Chief
Deputy Whip. Although generally identified with the San Francisco Bay Area,
where her political career began, Boxer now lives in the Coachella Valley.

At the time of her retirement, Boxer ranked eleventh in seniority in the
United States Senate, and was the most senior junior Senator from the
retirement of Tom Harkin in January 2015 until her own retirement two years
later. She was also dean of the California Congressional Delegation, despite
being the Junior Senator from California, as she spent 10 years as a US
Representative for California's 6th district before being elected to the
Senate in 1993.

On January 8, 2015, Boxer announced that she would not seek re-election in
2016.[5] She was succeeded by former California Attorney General Kamala
Harris.

Boxer was born in Brooklyn, New York, to Jewish immigrants Sophie (née
Silvershein; born in Austria) and Ira Levy.[ _better source needed_ ][6] She
attended public schools, and graduated from George W. Wingate High School in
1958.

In 1962, she married Stewart Boxer and graduated from Brooklyn College with a
bachelor's degree in economics. While in college she was a member of Delta Phi
Epsilon sorority and was a cheerleader for the Brooklyn College basketball
team.[7]

Boxer worked as a stockbroker for the next three years, while her husband went
to law school. Later, the couple moved to Greenbrae, Marin County, California,
and had two children, Doug and Nicole. She first ran for political office in
1972, when she challenged incumbent Peter Arrigoni, a member of the Marin
County Board of Supervisors, but lost a close election. Later during the
1970s, Boxer worked as a journalist for the _Pacific Sun_ and as an aide to
John Burton, then a member of Congress.[8] In 1976, Boxer was elected to the
Marin County Board of Supervisors, serving for six years.[9] She was the
Board's first woman president.[10]

On May 28, 1994, her daughter Nicole married Tony Rodham, the younger brother
of Hillary Clinton, in a ceremony at the White House attended by 250
guests.[11] (It was the first White House wedding since Tricia Nixon married
Edward Cox in 1971.)[11] Before divorcing, they had a child Zachary, born in
1995.[12] Zachary held a unique distinction of being both the grandson and
nephew of sitting U.S. senators.

In 2006, the Boxers sold their house in Greenbrae, where they had lived for
many years, and moved to Rancho Mirage.[13] Boxer's first novel, _A Time to
Run_ , was published in 2005 by San Francisco-based Chronicle Books.[14] Her
second novel, _Blind Trust_ , was released in July 2009 by Chronicle Books.

Boxer, then a Marin County supervisor, was elected to the United States House
of Representatives in 1982, succeeding John Burton. Her slogan was "Barbara
Boxer Gives a Damn." In the House, she represented California's 6th
congressional district (Marin and Sonoma Counties) for five terms. She
narrowly won her first election with 52 percent of the vote, but easily won
reelection four times, never dropping below 67 percent of the vote.

Boxer was a member of the original Select Committee on Children, Youth, and
Families[15] that was established in 1983.

In 1992, Boxer was implicated in the House banking scandal, which revealed
that more than 450 congressional representatives and aides, herself included,
wrote overdraft checks covered by overdraft protection by the House Bank. In
response, she issued a statement saying "in painful retrospect, I clearly
should have paid more attention to my account" and wrote a $15 check to the
Deficit Reduction Fund for each of her 87 overdrafts.[16]

In 1991, during the Anita Hill Senate hearings, where Hill accused U.S.
Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment, Boxer led a group
of women House members to the Senate Judiciary Committee – demanding that the
all-white, all-male Committee of Senators take Hill's charges seriously.[17]

In 1992 four-term incumbent Democratic Senator Alan Cranston retired, creating
an open seat contest. In what was billed as the "Year of the Woman", Boxer
beat fellow Rep. Mel Levine and Lieutenant Governor Leo McCarthy in the
Democratic primary, winning 44% of the vote. In the general election, Boxer
defeated Republican Bruce Herschensohn, a conservative television political
commentator from Los Angeles, by 4.9%. A last-minute revelation that
Herschensohn had attended a strip club at least partially affected the
outcome.[18] In 1998, she won a second term, beating sitting California State
Treasurer Matt Fong by 10.1% of the vote.[19] After facing no primary
opposition in the 2004 election, Boxer defeated GOP candidate Bill Jones, the
former California Secretary of State, by 20%.[20] In 2010, Boxer defeated GOP
candidate Carly Fiorina, former chief executive officer of Hewlett-Packard, by
10%.[21]

A member of the Senate Democratic Leadership, Boxer served as the Democratic
Chief Deputy Whip, which gives her the job of lining up votes on key
legislation.[22]

The following is an incomplete list of legislation that Boxer introduced in
the Senate.

On January 6, 2005, Boxer joined Representative Stephanie Tubbs Jones (D-Ohio)
in filing a U.S. Congressional objection to the certification of Ohio's
Electoral College votes in the 2004 U.S. presidential election.[26] She called
the objection her "opening shot to be able to focus the light of truth on
these terrible problems in the electoral system".[27][28] The Senate voted the
objection down 74–1; the House voted the objection down 267–31.[29] It was
only the second Congressional objection to an entire State's electoral
delegation in U.S. history; the first instance was in 1877.[30][31]

As a superdelegate, Boxer had declared that she would support the winner of
the California primary, which was won by Hillary Clinton.[32] However, she
reneged on that pledge and remained neutral, only officially backing Barack
Obama's candidacy the day after the last primaries, once he had garnered
enough delegate votes to clinch the nomination.[33]

Prior to Hillary Clinton's announcement, on October 20, 2013, Senator Boxer
was one of sixteen Democratic female senators to sign a letter endorsing
Clinton as the Democratic nominee in the 2016 Presidential Election.[34]

In April 2017, Boxer served as the keynote speaker for the Environmental
Student Assembly's Earth Month at the University of Southern California.[35]
She has also served as an advisor to Lyft and has advocated against the
passage of AB-5, proposed legislation in California that would rewrite the
rules of the gig economy.[36][37]

Senator Boxer was, along with Iowa Senator Tom Harkin, one of only two Senate
Democrats to come out in favor of Wisconsin Senator Russ Feingold's resolution
to censure President George W. Bush.[38]

During the confirmation hearings for the United States Secretary of State
nominee Condoleezza Rice in January 2005, Boxer challenged her to admit to
alleged mistakes and false statements made by the Bush Administration in
leading the United States into the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and ultimately voted
against confirmation, along with twelve other senators.[39][40] The dissent
was the highest vote against a Secretary of State nominee since 1825 when
Henry Clay was so named.[41]

Boxer voted against John Bolton's nomination for U.S. Ambassador to the United
Nations in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and filibustered him on the
Senate floor. As a result of the strong Democratic opposition Bolton could not
obtain Senate approval. However, President Bush bypassed the Senate by
employing the constitutional right of recess appointment, only the second time
such an appointment has been used for a United States ambassador to the United
Nations since the UN's founding in 1945. Recess appointments themselves have
been used numerous times by various presidents.

Boxer voted against the confirmation of Chief Justice of the United States
nominee John Roberts, and against the confirmation of Associate Justice
nominee Samuel Alito.[42][43]

Senators Boxer and John Ensign (R-NV) are the authors of the Invest in the USA
Act. This legislation, which was signed into law in October 2004 as a small
part of the more comprehensive American Jobs Creation Act, is intended to
encourage American companies to bring overseas profits back to the United
States, to create jobs in the U.S., and stimulate domestic economic growth.

In March 2004, Boxer offered an amendment to the Federal budget to create a
$24 billion jobs reserve fund. The amendment would set aside funds for a
variety of investments to improve the economy and create jobs by establishing
a manufacturing jobs tax credit for companies that create jobs in the United
States, expanding investment in science research and development, providing a
tax credit to small businesses to pay for health insurance for their
employees, and expanding trade adjustment assistance to help those who lose
their jobs because of foreign trade. The Boxer amendment would also end the
tax break that companies receive after moving plants overseas.

On October 1, 2008, Boxer voted in favor of the Emergency Economic
Stabilization Act.[44]

Senator Boxer further distinguished herself by being one of only eight members
of the Senate to vote against the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act in 1999.[
_citation needed_ ]

On August 26, 2013, Boxer told _The Ed Show_ on MSNBC that the federal minimum
wage should be raised to $10.00 an hour.[45]

Boxer established the Excellence in Education award to recognize teachers,
parents, businesses and organizations that are working to make positive
changes in education. Since 1997 Senator Boxer has presented the Excellence in
Education Award to 38 recipients.[46]

Boxer voted in support of the 2002 Help America Vote Act, which mandated the
use of voting machines across the country, among other provisions. On February
18, 2005, Senator Boxer and colleges introduced the Count Every Vote Act of
2005, which would provide a voter verified paper ballot for every vote cast in
electronic voting machines and ensure access to voter verification for all
citizens. The bill mandates that this ballot be the official ballot for
purposes of a recount. The bill sets a uniform standard for provisional
ballots and requires the Federal Election Assistance Commission to issue
standards that ensure uniform access to voting machines and trained election
personnel in every community. The bill also mandated improved security
measures for electronic voting machines.[47] The bill did not pass.

Boxer opposed the nuclear energy deal between the United States and India.
Boxer is of the opinion that India should not get help from the U.S. in the
civilian nuclear energy sector until it breaks its relationship with Iran.[48]

Boxer successfully led the 2003 Senate floor battle to block oil drilling in
the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.[49] In 2005, Boxer voted again to block
oil drilling at ANWR.

Boxer has introduced the National Oceans Protection Act (NOPA) of 2005.[50]
Some of the provisions of this act are: strengthen ocean governance; protect
and restore marine wildlife and habitats; address ocean pollution; improve
fisheries management. The bill also addresses needs regarding marine science,
research and technology, marine mammals, coastal development, and invasive
species.

Boxer is an original cosponsor of Senator Jim Jeffords' (I-VT) Clean Power
Act.[51] This legislation would reduce emissions of three pollutants coming
from power plants; sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and mercury, and also
reduce emissions of carbon dioxide .

As the new head of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee in
January 2007, Boxer wants to reduce energy consumption. She is attempting to
curb global warming by leading pilot programs. The few things that she and
some of her fellow Senators are doing could cut electricity consumption by as
much as 50 percent in their Capitol Hill offices.[52]

Senator Boxer was the Senate sponsor of the Northern California Coastal Wild
Heritage Wilderness Act, which was signed into law by President George W. Bush
on October 17, 2006. The bill protected 275,830 acres (1,116 km2) of federal
land as wilderness and 21 miles (34 km) of stream as a wild and scenic river,
including such popular areas as the King Range and Cache Creek.[53] Senator
Boxer worked with Senator Dianne Feinstein and Representative Mike Thompson
(the bill's House sponsor) in a five-year effort to pass the legislation.

Boxer along with her colleague Dianne Feinstein voted in favor of subsidy
payments to conventional commodity farm producers at the cost of subsidies for
conservation-oriented farming.[54]

In 1997, the Senate passed a Boxer resolution calling on the United States not
to recognize the Taliban as the official government of Afghanistan because of
its human rights abuses against women.

In 2002, Senator Boxer voted against the proposed US invasion of Iraq. She has
subsequently referred to that vote as the best vote of her career. She also
voted against the first Gulf War while a member of the House in 1991[55] and
was a very vocal protester against the Vietnam War in the 1970s.[56]

Boxer was a cosponsor of S. 495, or the Darfur Accountability Act of 2005,
which would impose sanctions against perpetrators of crimes against humanity
in Darfur.

In 2012 she and other bipartisan group of six senators introduced a resolution
condemning Russia for aiding Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's government as
the country faced civil war.[57]

In October 2002, Boxer voted against the joint resolution passed by the US
Congress to authorize the use of military force by the Bush Administration
against Iraq.[58][59][60] In June 2005, Senators Boxer and Russ Feingold of
Wisconsin, cosponsored Senate Resolution 171 calling for a timeframe for US
troop withdrawal from Iraq.

Boxer's petition demanding an exit strategy from Iraq drew 107,218
signatures.[61]

Boxer was sharply critical of US Army General David Petraeus' testimony
regarding the political and military situation of Iraq in 2007, charging him
with reporting while wearing "rosy glasses".[62]

Senator Boxer joined colleagues to pass a Federal ban on various semi-
automatic firearms and established the COPS program.

In the wake of the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting, Boxer posted on Facebook
that it was an "unspeakable tragedy" and she encouraged others to support
"common sense gun safety laws to protect our communities from these weapons of
war."[63]

Boxer co-sponsored the Matthew Shepard Act,[64] which expanded the federal
definition of hate crimes to include crimes based on the victim's sexual
orientation and gender identity.

Boxer was part of a coalition to increase medical research to find cures for
diseases. In 2007, she authored successful bipartisan legislation with Senator
Gordon Smith to combat HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis globally.[65] In 1997, she
authored a Patients' Bill of Rights. She has written a bill to make health
insurance tax-deductible and one to let any American buy into the same health
insurance program that members of Congress have. She supports comprehensive
prescription drug coverage through Medicare and the right of all consumers to
purchase lower-cost prescription drugs re-imported from Canada.[66]

In October 2002, Boxer urged the Bush Administration to take specific steps to
address the causes of the steep increase in autism cases in California.[67]
She wrote Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Tommy Thompson to
establish a common national standard for the diagnosis of autism; instruct the
CDC and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry to convene a task
force to review the current literature on autism and conduct its own study if
necessary; and direct the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers
for Disease Control (CDC) to work with the states to create a national chronic
disease database.

Boxer is an advocate for embryonic stem-cell research, which has the potential
to help those with diabetes, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, spinal
cord injuries, and other diseases.[68]

Senator Boxer supports PIPA.[69]

The Human Rights Campaign gave Boxer ratings of 100%, 88% and 100% for the
107th, 108th, and 109th sessions of Congress, respectively, indicating a
support of the HRC's slate of pro-gay rights legislative issues.[70] In 1996,
she was one of fourteen Senators to vote against the Defense of Marriage
Act[71] and also voted against the Federal Marriage Amendment in 2004 and
2006,[72] although when San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom issued a directive to
the city-county clerk to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples she
stated that she supported California's domestic partnership law but agreed
with its definition that marriage was between a man and a woman.[73] However,
her 2010 re-election campaign website states that "Senator Boxer supports
marriage equality."[74] She opposed Proposition 8, a constitutional amendment
that prohibited same-sex marriage in California, and supported the Uniting
American Families Act.[75]

Boxer has come out against reforming marijuana policy and is opposed to the
California Ballot measure to legalize and tax marijuana for those 21 and older
in the state.[76]

After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Boxer authored a bill to protect
commercial airliners against attacks by shoulder-fired missiles, and wrote the
law allowing airline pilots with special training to carry guns in the
cockpit.

Boxer wrote the High-Tech Port Security Act, and sponsored the Chemical
Security Act to address terrorist threats against chemical plants. Senator
Boxer also cosponsored comprehensive rail security legislation.

Boxer maintains a strong stance in support of reproductive rights and the pro-
choice movement. Boxer authored the Freedom of Choice Act of 2004 and
participated in the floor fight for passage of the Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act.

Boxer is an original cosponsor of the Title X Family Planning Services Act of
2005, S.844, by Senator Hillary Clinton (D-NY). This legislation aims to
improve access to women's health care. It authorizes funding for family
planning services grants; allows states to provide such services to
individuals who may not be eligible for Medicaid; prohibits health insurance
providers from excluding contraceptive services, drugs or devices from
benefits; establishes a program to disseminate information on emergency
contraception; requires hospitals receiving federal funding to offer emergency
contraception to victims of sexual assault; provides grants to public and
private entities to establish or expand teen pregnancy prevention programs;
and requires that federally funded education programs about contraception be
medically accurate and include information about health benefits and failure
rates.

She was strongly critical of the Stupak-Pitts Amendment, which would prevent
taxpayer-funded abortions possibly resulting in women not being able to pay
with their own funds for abortion coverage Affordable Health Care for America
Act.[77]

Boxer supports the current system of Social Security, and opposed President
George W. Bush's plan for partial privatization of Social Security.[78][79]

In June 2008 Boxer spoke in the Senate in opposition to the FISA Amendments
Act of 2008,[80] a pending bill in the United States Congress to amend the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act,[81] and later broke with her
counterpart Sen. Dianne Feinstein and voted against it.[82]

See also*

Project Vote Smart provides the following results from congressional
scorecards.[83]

Boxer criticized then United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's
judgment in relation to the war in Iraq: "I personally believe – this is my
personal view – that your loyalty to the mission you were given, to sell the
war, overwhelmed your respect for the truth."[85]

In January 2007, Boxer was in the news for comments she made when responding
to Bush's plans to send an additional 20,000 troops to Iraq. "Who pays the
price?" Boxer asked Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. "I'm not going to pay
a personal price. My kids are too old and my grandchild is too young. You're
not going to pay a personal price with an immediate family. So who pays the
price? The American military and their families... not me, not you." When Rice
interjected, Boxer responded by saying, "Madam Secretary, please. I know you
feel terrible about it. That's not the point. I was making the case as to who
pays the price for your decisions. And the fact that this administration would
move forward with this escalation with no clue as to the further price that
we're going to pay militarily... I find really appalling."[86]

Boxer has made cameo appearances as herself in several television shows,
including _Murphy Brown_ (1994),[87] _Gilmore Girls_ (2002)[87] and _Curb Your
Enthusiasm_ (2007),[88] as well as a cameo (as herself) in the 2000 film
_Traffic_.[87] On November 2, 2005, she made an appearance on _The Daily Show
with Jon Stewart_ to discuss her new novel _A Time To Run_.

In September 2012, it was reported that Boxer and soon-to-be-retired
Republican Senator Olympia Snowe would appear together in an NBC sitcom.[89]
On September 20, 2012, she and Senator Snowe appeared in the fifth season
premiere of _Parks and Recreation_. Boxer later returned to _Parks and
Recreation_ alongside several other U.S. senators in early 2015 in the seventh
season episode "Ms. Ludgate-Dwyer Goes to Washington."

In November 2016, Boxer appeared in an episode of _Chelsea_ , presented by
Chelsea Handler, entitled "Do Not Despair About Our Country", filmed shortly
after the result of the 2016 US presidential election was known, during which
Handler wept about the result.[90][91]

Boxer has been awarded with two Doctor of Laws honorary degrees, one from
Mills College and the other from Dominican University of California.

The Foundation for Ethics in Public Service has accused Boxer of failing to
disclose real property on her Personal Financial Disclosure Reports between
2002 and 2010. Boxer failed to disclose a million dollar home she owns.[92]

Boxer was first elected to the Senate by a 4.9% margin in 1992. She was
reelected in 1998, in 2004, and in 2010.

