**Charoen Pokphand Foods Public Company Limited** a company of the Charoen
Pokphand Group, is an agro-industrial and food conglomerate headquartered in
Thailand. Approximately 64 percent of its revenue came from overseas
operations, with 30 percent from its home market of Thailand, and six percent
from export operations. It recently acquired Bellisio Foods, one of the
largest frozen food suppliers in the United States, for US$1 billion, as well
as Westbridge Foods, a major British poultry producer with turnover of over
£340 Million [1]

The company's core businesses are livestock and aquaculture. Livestock
operations include chicken broilers, chicken layers, ducks, and swine. In
aquaculture, the two main marine animals are shrimp and fish.

Calendar year 2017 results: revenues of 501,507 million baht, net income of
15,259 million baht, and total assets of 593,497 million baht.[2] It employed
126,341 persons in 2017.[3]

CPF's livestock business includes broilers, layers, swine, and ducks. Products
can be divided into three main categories, animal feed, breeders, and meat and
food products.

The company produces livestock feed in the forms of concentrate, powder and
pellets for broilers, layers, swine, and ducks. The feed is distributed by
more than 600 sales representatives throughout Thailand. A portion of the
livestock feed is sold directly to large animal farms.[ _citation needed_ ]

The company researches and develops natural animal breeds. The goal is to
obtain breeds that are disease-free and suited to the breeding environment in
Thailand. The company produces parent stock broiler chicks, parent stock layer
chicks, parent stock swine, broiler chicks, layer chicks, layers, and piglets
for distribution to animal farms and domestic sales representatives.

Grandparent stock used in livestock breeding is imported from abroad to breed
parent stock which are then raised on the company's farms.[ _citation needed_
]

The NGO World Animal Protection succeeded in persuading CPF, a major pork
producer, to end the use of uses sow stalls in their pork production process
by 2025. The practice confines sows in cages no bigger than a refrigerator in
order to use them as "breeding machines". Sow stalls have been banned in the
UK since 1999 as well as in other jurisdictions.[4]

Products in this category can be further divided according to two types of
production processes: animal farming for commercial purposes and processing
and manufacture of cooked food products.

Products from animal farming for commercial purposes include live chickens,
eggs, live ducks, and live swine which are distributed to sales
representatives throughout the country. The products are also distributed in
surrounding local areas, to wholesalers and retailers, or to the company's
processing plants or other processing plants in Thailand.

The company has offices across the country, which act as centers for technical
information to farmers on how to properly raise animals to obtain fast growth
as well as assistance with marketing and distribution.

The company has a support program for the farming of swine and broilers. The
company selects farmers who have their own farms and farming equipment.
Selected farmers receive support in the areas of animal breeds, animal feed,
medication, and farming knowledge from the company. The company then
undertakes to purchase all yield which meets the CPF standards.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Broilers, ducks, and swine from the company's farms are brought to processing
plants to be butchered into meat products according to customer
specifications. The meats are packaged, frozen, and distributed as chilled and
frozen meat products to wholesalers, domestic retailers, and importers in
various countries. The company adds value to processed meat products by
flavoring and cooking through the process of boiling, steaming, frying, baking
and grilling according to customer specifications. Export products are
distributed through importers in various countries in the European Union,
Asia, and Japan.[ _citation needed_ ]

The aquaculture business includes mainly shrimp and some fish. The products
can be classified into three main categories: animal feed, animal breeders,
and meat and food products.

The company produces and distributes aquatic feed, with the main product being
shrimp feed. Aquatic feed is produced in the forms of concentrate, powder, and
pellets and distributed through sales representatives who are in shrimp
farming areas throughout the country. Agricultural products such as soybean
meal, fish meal, and wheat flour are used in the production of aquatic feed.[
_citation needed_ ]

Following the company's policy of supporting sustained growth and development
in the shrimp industry, the company has developed shrimp fry to distribute to
farmers, which will increase their opportunity to successfully farm shrimp. In
2004, the company entered into a joint venture with an American company with
shrimp breeding expertise to develop shrimp fry that are suitable to for
farming conditions in Thailand. The company's culture farms and hatcheries are
in the shrimp farming areas in the eastern and southern regions of Thailand.[
_citation needed_ ]

The company has developed fish breeds to distribute to farmers, including
tabtim fish fry, developed from tilapia fish. In 2006, the company also
succeeded in developing the morakot fish breed type, which was developed from
basa fish.[5]

Products in this category can be further divided according to two types of
production process: shrimp and fish farming for commercial purposes and
processing and manufacture of cooked food products.

"Traceability" has prompted the company to expand its shrimp farming business,
resulting in fully integrated operations that produce for the company's
processing plants as well as other processing plants in Thailand. In the
management of the company's shrimp farms, research and development and
technology are applied to find ways to prevent the outbreak of disease in
shrimp and farming methods, which are friendly to the environment and do not
cause residue build-up. The company promotes "probiotic farming" which avoids
the use of drugs and chemicals.[ _citation needed_ ]

Products derived from processing are one of the important products in the food
products category of the aquaculture business. The main products are processed
fresh shrimp and value-added processed shrimp, most of which are produced for
export as chilled and frozen products and distributed through importers in
various countries. The selling prices are also determined by agreement if the
products have been manufactured according to customer specifications.[
_citation needed_ ]

In June 2014, after a several-month-long investigation, the British newspaper
_The Guardian_ claimed that Charoen Pokphand Foods (CPF) purchases fishmeal,
which it then feeds to its farmed prawns, from suppliers that own, operate, or
buy from fishing boats manned with slaves. _The Guardian_ claimed that after
the slaves are bought "for as little as £250", the working conditions on those
boats included forced labor with 20-hour work days, forced drug use,
starvation, and executions.[6]

In July 2014, CP Foods hosted a three-day meeting to create a task force on
the issue, with representatives from retailers, local government authorities,
and non-governmental organisations such as Oxfam and the Environmental Justice
Foundation.[7] The progress made at this meeting is difficult to ascertain, as
the original newspaper, _The Guardian_ , has not posted any additional stories
and the company website's sustainability page[8] says "For the latest general
update covering our approach and achievements" to read a page from December
2013, which promises "a further progress update in Q1 2014."[9]

The president and CEO of Charoen Pokphand subsequently posted a "Statement to
Shareholders" vowing to purchase only from certified processing plants, only
acquire product from certified Thai fisheries, and that supply chain
"...fishing vessels, fishmeal processing plants...must be certified by
Thailand's Labor Standard or have been audited...by an external agency (Third
Party)...."[10]

In Australia, Woolworths stocks only CPF-Vietnam products and Metcash,
wholesale supplier to Independent Grocers of Australia (IGA), has eliminated
CPF SKUs from their inventory.[11]

In January 2017, the United States District Court, Northern District of
California ruled on multiple grounds in favour of CP Foods in relation to
litigation brought against them and others, which claimed damages related to
the alleged presence of human rights abuses in the supply chain for Thai
shrimp. The Court's order - dismissal with prejudice \- bars the plaintiffs
from bringing such claims again.

CP Foods only produces and sells farmed shrimp, and does not own or operate
any fishing vessels. The company has been working to improve the traceability
of the fishmeal element of its supply chain since 2012, and broadened this to
encompass a full traceability system for its farmed shrimp supply chain in
2014. As part of that process, CP Foods has significantly reduced the number
of suppliers that provide fishmeal for the production of shrimp feed. In
October 2018, CPF announced that by 2020 it will have audited all of its
suppliers for sustainability, including environmental, human rights, and labor
issues. Of particular focus are CPF's fishmeal suppliers, which represent "CP
Foods' only link to the ocean".[12]

CP Foods is currently undertaking a full independent, third-party audit of its
shrimp feed supply chain (all the way back to the individual fishing boats
catching fish for fishmeal production), conducted by a leading international
supply chain audit company. In addition, the by-product fishmeal in their
shrimp feed is certified _IFFO RS CoC_[13] \- the highest international
benchmark in the sustainable usage of fishmeal.

CP Foods is a founding member of the Shrimp Sustainable Supply Chain Task
Force (SSSC), established in July 2014, which has convened food producers,
international retailers, and NGO representatives to map out an audit plan for
the Thai shrimp industry, and to identify and agree the concrete steps and
timetable to increase the sustainability and transparency of the supply chain.
The key aim of CP Foods and the SSSC is to ensure that abuse of workers and
damage to the maritime ecosystem in the Gulf of Thailand and Andaman Sea
becomes a thing of the past, and to restore trust in the industry.[ _citation
needed_ ]

