**Charring** is a chemical process of incomplete combustion of certain solids
when subjected to high heat. Heat distillation removes water vapor and
volatile organic compounds (syngas) from the matrix. The residual black carbon
material is char, as distinguished from the lighter colored ash. By the action
of heat, charring removes hydrogen and oxygen from the solid, so that the
remaining char is composed primarily of carbon.[1] Polymers like thermoset, or
most solid organic compounds like wood or biological tissue, exhibit charring
behaviour.[2]

Charring means partially burning so as to blacken the surface.[1]

Charring can result from naturally occurring processes like fire; it is also a
deliberate and controlled reaction used in the manufacturing of certain
products. The mechanism of charring is part of the normal burning of certain
solid fuels like wood. During normal combustion, the volatile compounds
created by charring are consumed at the flames within the fire or released to
the atmosphere, while combustion of char can be seen as glowing red coals or
embers which burn without the presence of flames.[2]

Coke and charcoal are both produced by charring, whether on an industrial
scale or through normal combustion of coal or wood. Normal combustion consumes
the char as well as the gases produced in its creation, while industrial
processes seek to recover the purified char with minimal loss to combustion.
This is accomplished by either burning the parent fuel (wood or coal) in a
low-oxygen environment or by heating it to a high temperature without allowing
combustion to occur. In industrial production of coke and charcoal the
volatile compounds driven off during charring are often captured for use in
other chemical processes.

A "coal burning" blacksmith's forge actually produces the heat necessary for
high-temperature metalworking by the continuous production and consumption of
coke within a carefully managed fire. An inner ring of burning coke provides
heat which converts the encircling coal into coke, which is then itself fed
into the center of the fire to provide the required heat and to create more
coke; coal itself is incapable of producing the heat required for some
blacksmithing operations.

Charring is an important process in the combustion ignition of solid fuels and
in smouldering. In construction of heavy-timbered wood buildings the
predictable formation of char is used to determine the fire rating of
supporting timbers and is an important consideration in fire protection
engineering. If a wood column is of large enough diameter, during a structure
fire its exposed surface will be converted to char until the thickness of char
provides sufficient insulation to prevent additional charring. This layer then
serves to protect the remaining structurally sound core of wood, which can
continue to carry the building loads if appropriately designed.

Charring is also a technique used for wood preservation. In Japan this
traditional technique is called _yakisugi_ or _shō sugi ban_.[3]

Charring had a special meaning under the common law of England. Under that
system, the crime of arson required charring of a dwelling—actual damage to
the fiber of the material from which the structure was built—and not mere
"scorching" or damage to the surface, or to surface coverings such as carpets
and wallpaper.

