**Colin Farrell Camerer** (born December 4, 1959) is an American Behavioral
Financier and a Robert Kirby Professor of Behavioral Finance and Economics at
the California Institute of Technology (Caltech).

A former child prodigy, Camerer received a B.A. in quantitative studies from
Johns Hopkins University in 1977 (at age 17), followed by an M.B.A. in finance
from the University of Chicago in 1979 and a Ph.D. in behavioral decision
theory from that same institution in 1981 (at age 21) for thesis titled _The
Validity and Utility of Expert Judgment_ under the supervision of Hillel
Einhorn and Robin Hogarth.[1][2] Camerer worked at Kellogg, Wharton, and the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business before moving to Caltech in
1994.

Camerer's research is on the interface between cognitive psychology and
economics. This work seeks a better understanding of the psychological and
neurobiological basis of decision-making in order to determine the validity of
models of human economic behavior. His research uses mostly economics
experiments—and occasionally field studies—to understand how people behave
when making decisions (e.g., risky gambles for money), in games, and in
markets (e.g., speculative price bubbles).

He spoke at the Econometric Society World Congress in London on August 20,
2005 and at the Nobel Centennial Symposium in 2001 on Behavioral and
Experimental Economics.

He is the author of "Behavioral Game Theory" published by Princeton University
Press in 2003.

During the late 90's and until mid-2008, Camerer began instructing college
courses in fields such as Cognitive Psychology, Microeconomic Theory,
Behavioral Economics, and Organizational Design. These courses were held at a
variety of different universities, including the aforementioned California
Institute of Technology and additionally New York University. [3]

In September 2013, Camerer was named a MacArthur fellow.[4]

In 1983, Camerer started a record label called "Fever Records"[5] as "an
economics experiment". Bands that he signed to the label include the Dead
Milkmen, Big Black and Get Smart!.[6] The label was part of the Enigma Records
group of labels.

Another Fever Records was founded in the 1980s in New York City to distribute
rap records, and has no connection.

  

