The **Deficit Reduction Act of 2005**[1] is a United States Act of Congress
concerning the federal budget that became law in 2006.

The Senate's version passed after a tie-breaking vote was cast by Vice
President Dick Cheney. The bill passed the chamber with all Democrats and five
Republicans voting against the bill.[2] The House version passed by a vote of
217-215, with all Democrats, fourteen Republicans, and one Independent voting
against.[3] The Senate bill was signed by President George W. Bush on February
8, 2006.[4]

A dispute arose over whether both houses of Congress had approved the same
bill. Those contending that the bill is not a law argue there were different
versions of the same bill, neither of which was approved by both the House and
the Senate. They argue that the document signed by the President would not
have the force of law, on the ground that the enacting process bypassed the
Bicameral Clause of the U.S. Constitution.

Congressional leaders and administration officials point to an 1892 Supreme
Court case, _Field v. Clark_ (143 U.S. 649 (1892)), which said the
dispute—over differing versions of a bill that were certified by both
chambers—was not a matter for the courts to decide.[5]

The difference between the two versions is the provision regarding the length
of time that Medicare would be required to pay for durable medical equipment
such as wheelchairs and oxygen equipment like CPAP machines. The Senate
version of the bill restricted payments to 13 months while the House version
provided for 36 months, a $2 billion difference.[5] Just prior to the filing
of the bill in the House, a change was required to alter these time periods,
in three places the number 13 was changed to 36, by hand in the offices
controlled by the Speaker.[ _citation needed_ ] The change was needed to
assure the requisite number of votes for passage in the Senate. This hand
written drafting change gave rise to an error made by the Senate clerk later
in the process.[ _citation needed_ ]

The discrepancy resulted from what officials have called a clerical error in
the transmittal of the text between the Houses.[ _citation needed_ ] After the
bill was filed in the House of Representatives and voted on, it was sent to
the Senate. In that chamber, the bill was considered again. Several provisions
were stricken due to a point of order under section 313 of the Congressional
Budget Act (commonly known as the "Byrd Rule" after its author, Senator Robert
C. Byrd (D-WV)).[6] This necessitated return to the House to again be voted
on. In preparing the text for return to the House, certain numbers related to
payments in the Medicare program for certain durable medical equipment were
changed by mistake.[ _citation needed_ ] The House voted on a resolution[7]
concurring in this Senate amendment (with the legitimately stricken
provisions), but the text presented contained the erroneous number changes.[
_citation needed_ ] The approval resolution was passed in the House and the
text of the bill with errors in it was returned to the Senate for the
preparation to be presented to the President. There, the mistaken numbers were
corrected prior to the transmittal to the President.[ _citation needed_ ] The
bill as originally intended was signed into law, but some dispute remains[
_citation needed_ ] as to whether both Houses of Congress passed the same
legislation. The clerical mistake has given rise to several legal challenges
to the law, generally from those who disagree with the policies included
therein.

Representative Henry Waxman (D-CA) wrote a letter to Minority Leader (later
Speaker) Nancy Pelosi on February 14, 2006 saying three experts he consulted
(Professor Gerhardt, Professor Dorf, Professor Raskin) said the law was
clearly unconstitutional.[8]

Several entities brought lawsuits challenging the law.[9] Public Citizen, a
legislative watchdog group, filed suit in US District Court for the District
of Columbia. Attorney James Zeigler filed a similar suit in the United States
District Court for the Southern District of Alabama. A case brought by an
education finance company, OneSimpleLoan, went to the Supreme Court of the
United States, Docket No. 07-492, on a petition for writ of certiorari to the
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.[9] The petition was denied in
February, 2008.[10]

Representative John Conyers, ranking member of the House Judiciary Committee,
and ten other members of the House of Representatives sued President Bush (see
_Conyers v. Bush_ ), the Cabinet Secretaries, and others in an action in
district court in Detroit; the case was dismissed on November 6, 2006, citing
the representatives' lack of standing.[11] [12]

The Act purported to save nearly $40 billion over five years from mandatory
spending programs through slowing the growth in spending for Medicare and
Medicaid, changing student loan formulas[ _citation needed_ ], and other
measures.

The reauthorization of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program was
also contained in the bill, as was the provision for the Digital Transition
and Public Safety Act of 2005. Part of the TANF reauthorization reduces the
threshold for passport denial for child support arrearages under 42 USC 652(k)
to $2,500.

Section 3005 of the Act also provided one and a half billion dollars for the
Digital Transition and Public Safety Act of 2005 and defined in detail what
comprised a coupon-eligible converter box for Digital Television broadcasts in
the United States.

The law extends Medicaid's "lookback" period for all asset transfers from
three to five years and changes the start of the penalty period for
transferred assets from the date of transfer to the date when the individual
transferring the assets enters a nursing home and would otherwise be eligible
for Medicaid coverage. In other words, the penalty period does not begin until
the nursing home resident is out of funds, meaning she cannot afford to pay
the nursing home. In states that have filial responsibility laws, nursing
homes may seek reimbursement from the residents’ children. The Act also makes
any individual with home equity above $500,000 ineligible for Medicaid nursing
home care, although states may raise this threshold as high as $750,000. It
also establishes new rules for the treatment of annuities, including a
requirement that the state be named as the remainder beneficiary, allows
Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRCs) to require residents to spend
down their declared resources before applying for medical assistance, sets
forth rules under which an individual's CCRC entrance fee is considered an
available resource, requires all states to apply the so-called “income-first”
rule to community spouses who appeal for an increased resource allowance based
on their need for more funds invested to meet their minimum income
requirements, extends long-term care partnership programs to any state,[13]
and authorizes states to include home and community-based services as an
optional Medicaid benefit when they previously had to obtain a waiver to
provide such services.

In addition, the legislation incorporates provisions in the original budget
bill passed by the Senate closing certain asset transfer "loopholes," among
them:[13]

While the federal law applies to all transfers made on or after the date of
enactment (February 8, 2006), it also gives the states time to come into
compliance. This gives many people in most states a little time to plan. The
deadline for states to enact their own laws varies from state to state, but
generally is the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the
end of the next full legislative session.

