**EMI Records Ltd.** was a British record label founded by the music company
of the same name in 1972 as its flagship label, and launched in January 1973
as the successor to its Columbia and Parlophone record labels. The label was
later launched worldwide.[1] It has a branch in India called "EMI Records
India", run by director Mohit Suri.[2]

An E.M.I. Records Ltd. legal entity was created in 1956 as the record
manufacturing and distribution arm of EMI in the UK. It oversaw EMI's various
labels, including The Gramophone Co. Ltd., Columbia Graphophone Company, and
Parlophone Co. Ltd.[3]

The global success that EMI enjoyed in the 1960s exposed the fact that the
company had the rights to only some of its trademarks in some parts of the
world, most notably His Master's Voice and Columbia, with RCA Victor Records
and the American Columbia Records owning the rights to these trademarks in
North America.

Complicating matters was Columbia's formation of its own operations in the UK
by purchasing Oriole Records and changing its name to that of its then-parent
company CBS (the legal trademark designation bearing the full name of the
parent company, "Trade Mark of Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc."), and as
CBS Records International becoming highly successful, a serious rival to EMI,
in the UK.

In July 1965, the standalone EMI Record labels were extracted from E.M.I.
Records Ltd. and folded into The Gramophone Company Ltd. On 1 July 1973, The
Gramophone Co. Ltd. was renamed EMI Records Ltd. At the same time, E.M.I.
Records Ltd. was wound down and its activities were absorbed into EMI Records
Ltd.[4]

Earlier, on 1 January 1973, all of The Gramophone Company Ltd. pop labels
(Columbia, Parlophone, Harvest, Sovereign and Regal) had been rebranded as
EMI. EMI Records then signed new musical acts that became global successes:
Kraftwerk, Renaissance, Queen, Olivia Newton-John, Iron Maiden, Kate Bush,
Sheena Easton, Pink Floyd, and Robbie Williams (though some of these acts were
on different labels in the US, not EMI's Capitol Records). In 1978, EMI
launched EMI America Records as its second label in the United States after
Capitol, and in 1988, EMI America later merged with sister label Manhattan
Records, founded in 1984,[5] becoming EMI Manhattan Records and eventually EMI
USA when Capitol absorbed it in 1990. In 1997, EMI Records' American division
was folded into Virgin Records and Capitol.

In 2010, EMI Records opened a country music division, EMI Records Nashville,
which includes on its roster Troy Olsen, Alan Jackson, Kelleigh Bannen, and
Eric Church. EMI Records Nashville is a sister label to the Capitol Nashville
unit of Universal Music Group.[6]

Australia's most prolific artist, Slim Dusty, signed with the Columbia
Graphophone Co. for Regal Zonophone Records in 1946 and remained with EMI
until his death in 2003, selling over 7 million records for the label in
Australia by 2007.

Virgin EMI Records retains use of the EMI branding after Universal Music
Group's acquisition of EMI in September 2012, but it is otherwise unrelated to
the old label which was defunct and renamed Parlophone Records in 2013 and is
now part of Warner Music Group.[7] EMI Christian Music Group was renamed
Capitol Christian Music Group. EMI Classics was sold to Warner Music Group in
February 2013. After EU regulatory approval, EMI Classics was absorbed into
Warner Classics in July 2013.[8] The reissues from EMI America and EMI Records
USA are handled by UMG's Capitol Music Group, Virgin Records' American
distributor.

In Japan, Universal Music Japan did a label reorganization in February 2014,
with more than half of the EMI Records Japan artists being transferred to
Nayutawave Records, renaming to just simply EMI Records.

