_**College Humor**_ is a 1933 American pre-Code musical comedy film, directed
by Wesley Ruggles, and starring Bing Crosby, Jack Oakie, Richard Arlen, Mary
Kornman and Mary Carlisle. Based on a story by Dean Fales, the film is about a
college professor and the school's star football player who become rivals for
the same beautiful coed. Released by Paramount Pictures, the film co-stars
George Burns and Gracie Allen.[1]

Barney Shirrel (Oakie) starts his first semester at Mid West University and
works his way up in the fraternity with the help of Tex Roust (Joe Sawyer) and
Mondrake (Arlen), an alcoholic college football star. Barney is passionate
about engineering and the law, and between his varied studies, football, and
the fraternity, he neglects his girl friend Amber (Kornman). In the next term,
Mondrake gives his class sweater to Barney's sister Barbara (Carlisle). His
drinking problem intensifies, however, when he learns that Barbara is falling
in love with Professor Danvers (Crosby), the singing drama teacher. When
Mondrake fails to show up at an important football game against a rival
university, Danvers finds him in jail. With the school's reputation at stake,
Danvers has him released and takes him to the football field in time to play
in the game.

Afterwards, Danvers is called before the college president (Lumsden Hare).
Although rivals for Barbara's affections, Danvers stands up for Mondrake. The
college president expels Mondrake for drunkenness and forces Danvers to resign
because of his involvement in the matter. Feeling guilty over causing
Mondrake's expulsion, Barbara proposes marriage to him. Later, however, she
admits that she is not in love with him, but with Danvers. Mondrake bows out
of the relationship, and Barbara rushes to Danvers' side before he leaves.

During the next term, Barney has followed Mondrake's example and taken up
drinking and smoking, which is not appealing to Amber. At the big football
game, Barney is in sorry shape. Mid West is losing until he receives
inspiration from Tex, who has returned to watch the game. After being knocked
out, Barney recovers and wins the game for Mid West. Some time later, Barney
and Amber get married and they move to his father's dairy, where Barney works
his way up from the lowest position. Barney and Amber enjoy listening to
Danvers singing his song on the radio.

The reception was generally favorable, although _The New York Times_
commented: "Looked at as a whole, it emerges as an unsteady entertainment,
with no very discernible intent, theme or goal, but with a modest fund of
humor and two or three heartily amusing patches...Mr. Oakie’s owlish efforts
to assimilate an education help the comedy along and Miss Carlisle is a very
model of a model musical comedy co-ed. Mr. Arlen is reliably pleasant.[2]
_Variety_ liked it better. "Between Crosby for romance and Oakie for laughs,
the picture has a strong pair of male leads...Crosby makes his best showing to
date with a chance to handle both light comedy and romance. His pale face
makeup is the only flaw so it looks like all he needs is a new paint job and
another good role."[3]  

The reaction in Hollywood was more enthusiastic with _The Hollywood Reporter_
saying: "‘College Humor’, by the way, is drawing the longest lines that have
been seen in some time and people are getting all excited over a new
discovery—Bing Crosby. They’ve suddenly discovered what a grand personality
the lad has, even when he isn’t singing. The public is sometimes slow, but
always proud of its discoveries."[4]

Crosby recorded the songs for Brunswick Records[8] and "Learn to Croon" and
"Down the Old Ox Road" reached the charts of the day peaking at No. 3 and No.
8 respectively.[9]

