**Frodo Baggins** is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium,
and the main protagonist of _The Lord of the Rings_. Frodo is a hobbit of the
Shire who inherits the One Ring from his cousin (referred to as his uncle)
Bilbo Baggins and undertakes the quest to destroy it in the fires of Mount
Doom. He is also mentioned in Tolkien's posthumously published works, _The
Silmarillion_ and _Unfinished Tales_.

Frodo did not appear until the third draft of _A Long-Expected Party_ (the
first chapter of _The Lord of the Rings_ ), when he was named Bingo (after a
family of toy koala owned by Tolkien's children), son of Bilbo Baggins and
Primula Brandybuck.[1] In the fourth draft, he was renamed Bingo Bolger-
Baggins, son of Rollo Bolger and Primula Brandybuck.[2] Tolkien did not change
the name to Frodo until the third phase of writing, when much of the
narrative, as far as the hobbits' arrival in Rivendell, had already taken
shape.[3] Prior to this, the name "Frodo" had been used for the character who
eventually became Peregrin Took.[4]

Frodo is introduced in _The Fellowship of the Ring_ as the adoptive heir of
Bilbo Baggins. The chapter "A Long-expected Party" relates that Frodo's
parents Drogo Baggins and Primula Brandybuck had been killed in a boating
accident when Frodo was 12; Frodo subsequently spent the next nine years
living with his maternal family, the Brandybucks in Brandy Hall. At the age of
21 he was adopted by his cousin,[note1 1] Bilbo, who brought him to live at
Bag End. He and Bilbo shared the same birthday, the 22nd of 'September'. It
was Bilbo who introduced the Elvish languages to Frodo, and they often shared
long walking trips together.

Frodo and Meriadoc Brandybuck are first cousins once removed, since Frodo is
first cousin to Meriadoc's father, Saradoc Brandybuck. Their common ancestors
are Gorbadoc Brandybuck and Mirabella Took Brandybuck. Frodo is moreover
second (through her paternal grandfather Hildigrim Took) and third (through
her paternal grandmother Rosa Baggins) cousin to Meriadoc's mother, Esmeralda
Took. Frodo is also related to Peregrin Took, being his second and third
cousin once removed (Peregrin's father, Paladin Took is, like his sister
Esmeralda, second and third cousin to Frodo, as explained above). Even
Fredegar Bolger (through his mother Rosamund Took) is second cousin once
removed to Frodo. Frodo also shares a close friendship with his gardener
Samwise Gamgee although they have no family tie.[5]

_The Fellowship of the Ring_ opens as Frodo comes of age and Bilbo leaves the
Shire for good on his one hundred and eleventh birthday. Frodo inherited Bag
End and Bilbo's ring, which were both introduced in _The Hobbit_. Gandalf, at
this time, was not certain about the origin of the Ring, so he warned Frodo to
avoid using it and to keep it secret. Frodo kept the Ring hidden for the next
17 years, resulting in it giving him the same longevity of Bilbo, until
Gandalf returned to tell him that it was the One Ring of the Dark Lord Sauron,
who desired to use it to conquer Middle-earth.

Realizing that he was a danger to the Shire as long as he remained there with
the Ring, Frodo decided to leave home, at the age of 50, and take the Ring to
Rivendell, home of Elrond, a mighty Elf lord. He left the Shire with three
companions: his gardener Samwise Gamgee and his cousins Meriadoc Brandybuck
and Peregrin Took. They escaped just in time, for Sauron's most powerful
servants, the Nine Nazgûl, had entered the Shire as Black Riders, looking for
Bilbo and the Ring. They followed Frodo's trail across the Shire and nearly
intercepted him.

Frodo and his companions escaped the Black Riders by travelling through the
Old Forest, but they were misled by the magic of Old Man Willow until they
were rescued by Tom Bombadil, who gave them shelter and guided them on their
way. After leaving Bombadil, they were caught in fog on the Barrow Downs by
Barrow-wights and were entranced under a spell. Frodo broke loose from the
spell, attacked the barrow-wight and summoned Tom Bombadil, who again rescued
the hobbits and set them on their way.

At the _Prancing Pony_ , an inn in the village of Bree, Frodo received a
delayed letter from Gandalf, and met Aragorn, also called Strider, a Ranger of
the North. The One Ring slipped onto Frodo's finger inadvertently in the
_Prancing Pony'_ s common room, turning Frodo invisible. This attracted the
attention of Sauron's agents, who ransacked the hobbits' rooms in the night.
The group, under Aragorn's guidance, quickly fled through the Midgewater
Marshes and again escaped the Nazgûl.

While encamped at Amon Sûl, they were found and attacked by five Nazgûl. The
chief of the Nazgûl, known as the Witch-king of Angmar, stabbed Frodo with a
Morgul-blade, before Aragorn routed all five of them with fire. A piece of
this blade remained in Frodo's shoulder and, working its way towards his
heart, threatened to turn him into a wraith under the control of the Witch-
king. With the help of his companions and Glorfindel, Frodo was able to evade
the remaining Ringwraiths and reach Rivendell. Although almost overcome by his
wound, once there he was healed over time by Elrond; it was said and later
seen that the wound would never completely heal, however, as it was as much
spiritual as physical.

In Rivendell, the Council of Elrond met and resolved to destroy the Ring by
casting it into Mount Doom in Mordor, the realm of Sauron. Frodo, realizing
that he was destined for this task, stepped forward to be the Ring-bearer. A
Fellowship of nine companions was formed to guide and protect him: the
hobbits, Gandalf, Aragorn, the dwarf Gimli, the elf Legolas of Mirkwood, and
Boromir, a man of Gondor. Together they set out from Rivendell. Frodo was
armed with Sting, Bilbo's Elvish knife, and wore Bilbo's coat of Dwarven mail
made of _mithril_. The company, seeking a way over the Misty Mountains, first
tried the Pass of Caradhras, but abandoned it in favour of the mines of Moria.
In Moria Frodo was stabbed by an Orc-spear, but his coat of _mithril_ armour
saved his life. They were led through the mines by Gandalf, until he fell
battling a Balrog, and then by Aragorn to Lothlórien. There Galadriel, the
Lady of the Woods, gave Frodo an Elven cloak and a phial carrying the Light of
Eärendil to aid him on his dangerous quest.

Having then travelled for nine days down the Anduin River with Elven-boats,
the Fellowship reached Parth Galen. There, Boromir, having fallen to the lure
of the Ring, tried to take it by force from Frodo. Frodo escaped by putting on
the Ring and becoming invisible. This event broke the Fellowship; Boromir was
later slain defending Merry and Pippin from invading Orcs, who captured the
two hobbits. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas gave him a hero's funeral before
setting out after the two hobbits. Frodo chose to continue the quest alone,
but Sam followed his master, joining him on the journey to Mordor.

Frodo and Sam made their way through Emyn Muil, followed by the creature
Gollum, who had been tracking the Fellowship since Moria, seeking to reclaim
the Ring he had possessed for centuries. After Gollum attacked the hobbits,
Frodo subdued him with Sting. He then took pity on Gollum, and spared his life
(just as Bilbo had done in _The Hobbit_ ), instead binding him to a promise to
guide them through the Dead Marshes to the Black Gate, which Gollum did.
Gollum said that there was "another way" into Mordor, and Frodo, over Sam's
objections, allowed him to lead them south into Ithilien. It was there that
they met Faramir, younger brother of Boromir, who took them to Henneth Annûn.
There Frodo allowed Gollum to be captured by Faramir, saving Gollum's life but
leaving him feeling betrayed by his "master". After giving them provisions,
Faramir allowed the two hobbits and Gollum to go on their way, but warned
Frodo of Gollum's treachery.

The three of them passed near to Minas Morgul, where the pull of the Ring
became almost unbearable. There, they began the long climb up the Endless
Stair, and at the top entered the tunnel, not knowing it was the home of the
giant spider Shelob. Gollum hoped to deliver the hobbits to her and retake the
Ring from her leavings. Shelob stung Frodo, rendering him unconscious, but Sam
drove her off with Sting and the Phial of Galadriel. After attempting
unsuccessfully to wake Frodo, and unable to find any signs of life, Sam
concluded that he was dead and decided that his only option was to take the
Ring and continue the quest. However, Orcs from Cirith Ungol soon found
Frodo's body and knew that he was not dead. Planning to interrogate him after
his awakening, they carried him into the tower at the head of the pass.

Sam rescued Frodo from the Orcs of Cirith Ungol. After a brief confrontation
in which Frodo became enraged that Sam had taken the Ring, Sam restored the
Ring to him. The two of them, dressed in scavenged Orc-armour, set off for
Mount Doom, trailed by Gollum. They witnessed the plains of Gorgoroth empty at
the approach of the Armies of the West, but at one point they barely escaped
being drafted into an Orc-band. With the Ring getting closer to its master,
Frodo became progressively weaker as its influence grew. After running out of
water, they left all unnecessary baggage behind to travel light. As they
reached Mount Doom, Gollum reappeared and attacked Frodo, who beat him back.
While Sam fought with Gollum, Frodo went on to Sammath Naur within the
volcano, where Sauron had forged the Ring. Here, however, Frodo lost the will
to destroy the Ring, and instead put it on, claiming it for himself. Gollum
got past Sam and attacked the invisible Frodo, biting off his finger, and
finally regained his "precious". As he danced around in elation, Gollum lost
his balance and fell with the Ring into the lava. The Ring was thus destroyed,
and with it Sauron's power. Frodo and Sam were rescued by the reborn Gandalf
and several Great Eagles as Mount Doom erupted.

After reuniting with the Fellowship and attending Aragorn's coronation as King
of Gondor, the four hobbits returned to the Shire to find it taken over by a
gang of ruffians, led initially by Frodo's cousin, Lotho Sackville-Baggins,
and then by the fallen wizard Saruman. The four travellers roused their fellow
hobbits and led them in driving the ruffians out. There they witnessed the
deaths of both Saruman and his henchman Gríma.

Frodo never completely recovered from the physical, emotional and
psychological wounds he suffered during the War of the Ring. He was taken ill
on the anniversaries of his wounding on Weathertop and his poisoning by
Shelob. He briefly served as Deputy Mayor of the Shire, but spent most of his
time writing the tale of his travels. Two years after the Ring was destroyed,
Frodo and Bilbo as Ring-bearers were granted passage to Valinor — where Frodo
might find peace. They boarded a ship at the Grey Havens and together with
Gandalf, Elrond and Galadriel, the Keepers of the Three Rings, they passed
over the sea and departed Middle-earth. Having no children of his own Frodo
left his estate, along with the Red Book of Westmarch, to Sam.

According to Appendix D of _The Lord of the Rings_ , Frodo’s birthday was made
a festival in Minas Tirith.

"The Sea-Bell" was published in Tolkien's 1962 collection of verse _The
Adventures of Tom Bombadil_ with the sub-heading _Frodos Dreme_. Tolkien
suggests that this enigmatic, narrative poem represents the despairing dreams
that visited Frodo in the Shire in the years following the destruction of the
Ring. It relates the otherwise unnamed speaker's journey to a mysterious land
across the sea, where he tries but fails to make contact with the people who
dwell there. He descends into despair and near-madness, eventually returning
to his own country, to find himself utterly alienated from those he once knew.

Gandalf described Frodo as "taller than some and fairer than most, [with] a
cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye."[6] He had thick, curly brown
hair like most other hobbits, and had fair skin due to his Fallohide ancestry.

Bilbo and Frodo shared a common birthday on 22nd 'September', but Bilbo was 78
years Frodo's senior. At the opening of _The Fellowship of the Ring_ , Frodo
and Bilbo were celebrating their thirty-third and one hundred and eleventh
birthdays, respectively. Frodo inherited the Ring at this point, and due to
its influence he still appeared about 33 during the War of the Ring, though
his age was closer to 50.

Frodo, like Bilbo and his Took ancestors, was considered by many others in
Hobbiton to be a little odd. His interest in the outside world and fascination
with Elves and faraway places such as Bilbo had visited in _The Hobbit_ were
uncommon among hobbits.

When the hobbits were waylaid by the Barrow-wight, they found long daggers
made by Dúnedain in the wight's treasure. These served as short-swords for the
hobbits, but Frodo's was broken when he resisted the Witch-king at the Ford of
Bruinen. Later, Bilbo gave Frodo Sting, a magic Elvish dagger, and a coat of
_mithril_ chain mail. The mail saved him from injury or death on four
occasions, deflecting a spear-point and an Orc-arrow in the Mines of Moria,
another Orc-arrow along the Anduin, and finally Saruman's knife at Bag End.
Frodo wounded the Barrow-wight and a cave troll, but never killed anyone.

Like other members of the Fellowship of the Ring, Frodo received in Lórien a
special cloak from Galadriel, which allowed him to blend in with natural
surroundings. Galadriel also gave him a vial that reflected the light of
Eärendil, the Evenstar, (and, by extension, of the Two Trees of Valinor).

He was very compassionate, pitying Gollum and allowing him to guide him and
Sam to Mordor despite Sam's distrust of the creature. This act of kindness
later proved to be a factor in the quest's success in destroying the Ring.

The influence of the Ring and the wound by the Morgul-blade, along with
subsequent healing by Elrond, had seemingly combined to give him the ability
to see into the spirit world; he sees faraway events in dreams on several
occasions. He also can see the ring of power worn by Galadriel.

In Gondor, Arwen Evenstar gave him a white jewel on a silver chain, saying
that if the memory of his dark journey and his painful wounds continued to
trouble him, he could depart to Valinor for a time. The book states that he
"wore always a white gem like a star, that he often would finger."[7]

Frodo is referred to by several names and titles. On leaving the Shire he uses
the alias "Mr Underhill". Gildor Inglorion calls him "Elf-friend" in
acknowledgement of his ability to speak Elvish. After the Council of Elrond he
is given the title "Ring-bearer". After the fulfilment of the quest bards call
him "Nine-fingered Frodo" or "Frodo of the Nine Fingers", as Gollum had bitten
off his finger to take the Ring from him.

Frodo is the only prominent hobbit whose name is not explained in Tolkien’s
Appendices to _The Lord of the Rings_. In his letters Tolkien states that it
is derived from Old English _fród_ meaning "wise by experience". A character
from Norse mythology called Fróði is mentioned in _Beowulf_ , where it is
rendered in Old English as Froda. Tolkien did mention he changed final a's to
final o's in male Hobbit names.

In the early drafts of _The Lord of the Rings_ the principal character is
called Bingo Baggins; the name Frodo is given to another hobbit. In the drafts
of the final chapters of _The Lord of the Rings_ published by Christopher
Tolkien as _Sauron Defeated_ , Gandalf names Frodo _Bronwe athan Harthad_
(Endurance Beyond Hope) after the destruction of the Ring. Tolkien states that
Frodo’s name in the fictional language of Westron was _Maura Labingi_.[8] His
name in Sindarin (another of Tolkien's invented languages) appears to have
been _Iorhael_ ,[9] which is derived from _ior_ meaning "old" and _hael_
meaning "wise". In _The Return of the King_ he is also referred to by the name
_Daur_ , a Sindarin word meaning "noble" [10] (or perhaps "wise by
experience," if it means the same as "Frodo" does.)

In Ralph Bakshi's 1978 animated version of _The Lord of the Rings_ , Frodo was
voiced by Christopher Guard.

In the 1980 Rankin/Bass animated version of _The Return of the King_ , made
for television, the character was voiced by Orson Bean, who had previously
played Bilbo in the same company's adaptation of _The Hobbit_.

In the 1981 BBC radio serial of _The Lord of the Rings_, Frodo is played by
Ian Holm, who later played Bilbo in Peter Jackson's film adaptation of _The
Lord of the Rings_.

In the 1993 television miniseries _Hobitit_ by Finnish broadcaster Yle, Frodo
is played by Taneli Mäkelä.

In _The Lord of the Rings_ film trilogy (2001–2003) directed by Peter Jackson,
Frodo is played by American actor Elijah Wood. Dan Timmons writes in the
Mythopoeic Society's _Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson’s The Lord of
the Rings_ (Mythopoeic Press, 2005) that the themes and internal logic of the
Jackson films are undermined by the portrayal of Frodo, whom he considers a
weakening of Tolkien's original.[11] Elijah Wood reprised his role of Frodo in
_The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey_ , the first part of _The Hobbit_ trilogy
(2012–2014).

On stage, Frodo was portrayed by James Loye in the three-hour stage production
of _The Lord of the Rings_ , which opened in Toronto in 2006, and was brought
to London in 2007. In the United States, Frodo was portrayed by Joe Sofranko
in the Cincinnati productions of _The Fellowship of the Ring_ (2001), _The Two
Towers_ (2002), and _The Return of the King_ (2003) for Clear Stage
Cincinnati. In Chicago, Patrick Blashill played Frodo in the Lifeline Theatre
production of _The Two Towers_ in 1999.

