  
Ireland is an island in Northwestern Europe in the north Atlantic Ocean. The
island lies on the European continental shelf, part of the Eurasian Plate. The
island's main geographical features include low central plains surrounded by
coastal mountains. The highest peak is Carrauntoohil (Irish: _Corrán Tuathail_
), which is 1,041 meters (3,415 ft) above sea level. The western coastline is
rugged, with many islands, peninsulas, headlands and bays. The island is
bisected by the River Shannon, which at 360.5 km (224 mi) with a 102.1 km (63
mi) estuary is the longest river in Ireland and flows south from County Cavan
in Ulster to meet the Atlantic just south of Limerick. There are a number of
sizeable lakes along Ireland's rivers, of which Lough Neagh is the largest.

Politically, the island consists of the Republic of Ireland, with jurisdiction
over about five-sixths of the island; and Northern Ireland, a constituent
country (and an unconfirmed "practical" exclave) of the United Kingdom, with
jurisdiction over the remaining sixth. Located west of the island of Great
Britain, it is located at approximately 53°N 8°W﻿ / ﻿53°N 8°W﻿ / 53;
-8Coordinates: 53°N 8°W﻿ / ﻿53°N 8°W﻿ / 53; -8. It has a total area of 84,421
km2 (32,595 sq mi).[1] It is separated from Great Britain by the Irish Sea and
from mainland Europe by the Celtic Sea. Ireland and Great Britain, together
with nearby islands, are known collectively as the British Isles; as the term
British Isles is controversial in relation to Ireland, the alternative term
'Britain and Ireland' is increasingly preferred.[2]

The geology of Ireland is diverse. Different regions contain rocks belonging
to different geologic periods, dating as far back almost 2 billion years. The
oldest known Irish rock is about 1.7 billion years old and is found on
Inishtrahull Island off the north coast of Inishowen[3][4] and on the mainland
at Annagh Head on the Mullet Peninsula.[5] The newer formations are the
drumlins and glacial valleys as a result of the last ice age, and the
sinkholes and cave formations in the limestone regions of Clare.[6][7]

Ireland's geologic history covers everything from volcanism and tropical seas
to the last glacial period. Ireland was formed in two distinct parts and
slowly joined together, uniting about 440 million years ago. As a result of
tectonics and the effect of ice, the sea level has risen and fallen. In every
area of the country the rocks which formed can be seen as a result. Finally,
the impact of the glaciers shaped the landscape seen today.[8] This variation
in the two areas along with the differences between volcanic areas and shallow
seas gives Ireland a range of soils as well. There are wide bogs and free-
draining brown earths. The mountains are granite, sandstone, limestone with
karst areas, and basalt formations.[9][10][11][12]

Lion's share of Ireland has with most likehood been above sea level during the
last 60 million years. As such its landscapes have been shaped by erosion and
weathering on land.[13] Protracted erosion does also means most of the
Paleogene and Neogene sediments have been eroded away or, as known in a few
cases, buried by Quaternary deposits.[14] Before the Quaternary glaciations
affected Ireland the landscape had developed thick weathered regolith on the
uplands and karst in the lowlands.[13] There have been some controversy
regarding the origin of the planation surfaces found on Ireland.[14][15] While
some have argued for an origin in marine planation others regard these
surfaces as peneplains formed by weathering and fluvial erosion. Not only is
their origin disputed but also their actual extent and the relative role of
sea-level change and tectonics in their shaping.[14] Most river systems in
Ireland formed in the Cenozoic before the Quaternary glaciations. Rivers
follow for most of their course structural features of the geology of
Ireland.[13] Marine erosion since the Miocene may have made Ireland's western
coast retreat more than 100 km. Pre-Quaternary relief was more dramatic than
today's glacier-smoothened landscapes.[13]

Ireland consists of a mostly flat low-lying area in the midlands, ringed by
mountain ranges such as (beginning in County Kerry and working counter-
clockwise) the MacGillycuddy's Reeks, Comeragh Mountains, Blackstairs
Mountains, Wicklow Mountains, the Mournes, Glens of Antrim, Sperrin Mountains,
Bluestack Mountains, Derryveagh Mountains, Ox Mountains, Nephinbeg Mountains
and the Twelve Bens/Maumturks group. Some mountain ranges are further inland
in the south of Ireland, such as the Galtee Mountains (the highest inland
range),[16] Silvermine and Slieve Bloom Mountains. The highest peak
Carrauntoohil, 1,038 m (3,405 ft) high,[17] is in the MacGillycuddy's Reeks, a
range of glacier-carved sandstone mountains. Ireland's mountains are not high
– only three peaks are over 1,000 m (3,281 ft)[17] and another 457 exceed 500
m (1,640 ft).[18] Ireland is sometimes known as the "Emerald Isle" because of
its green landscape.

The main river in Ireland is the River Shannon. 360.5 km (224.0 mi) The
longest river in Ireland, it separates the midlands of Ireland from the west
of the island. The river develops into three lakes along its course, Lough
Allen, Lough Ree, and Lough Derg. Of these, Lough Derg is the largest.[17] The
River Shannon enters the Atlantic Ocean after Limerick city at the Shannon
Estuary. Other major rivers include the River Liffey, River Lee, River
Blackwater, River Nore, River Suir, River Barrow, River Bann, River Foyle,
River Erne, and River Boyne (see the list of rivers in Ireland).

Lough Neagh, in Ulster,[17] is the largest lake in Ireland and Britain with a
size of 392 km2 (151 sq mi). The largest lake in the Republic of Ireland is
Lough Corrib 176 km2 (68 sq mi). Other large lakes include Lough Erne.[17]

Beginning with County Donegal, Lough Swilly separates one side of the
Inishowen peninsula. Lough Foyle on the other side, is one of Ireland's larger
inlets, situated between County Donegal and County Londonderry.[19] Further
round the coast is Belfast Lough, between County Antrim and County Down.[20]
Also in County Down is Strangford Lough, actually an inlet partially
separating the Ards peninsula from the mainland. Further down the coast,
Carlingford Lough is situated between Down and County Louth.[20]

Dublin Bay is the next sizeable inlet, while the eastern coast of Ireland is
mostly uniform until Wexford Harbour at the mouth of the River Slaney.[21] On
the southern coast, Waterford Harbour is situated at the mouth of the River
Suir[22] (into which the other two of the Three Sisters (River Nore and River
Barrow) flow). The next major inlet is Cork Harbour, at the mouth of the River
Lee, in which Great Island is situated.

Dunmanus Bay, Kenmare estuary and Dingle Bay are all inlets between the
peninsulas of County Kerry. North of these is the Shannon Estuary. Between
north County Clare and County Galway is Galway Bay. Clew Bay is located on the
coast of County Mayo, south of Achill Island, while Broadhaven Bay, Blacksod
Bay and Sruth Fada Conn bays are situated in northwest Connacht, in North
Mayo. Killala Bay is on the northeast coast of Mayo. Donegal Bay is a major
inlet between County Donegal and County Sligo.[19]

Malin Head is the most northerly point in Ireland,[23] while Mizen Head is one
of the most southern points, hence the term "Malin head to Mizen head" (or the
reverse) is used for anything applying to the island of Ireland as a whole.
Carnsore Point is another extreme point of Ireland, being the southeastern
most point of Ireland. Further along the coast is Hook Head while the Old Head
of Kinsale is one of many headlands along the south coast of Ireland.

Loop Head is the headland at which County Clare comes to a point on the west
coast of Ireland, with the Atlantic on the north, and further inland on the
south, the Shannon estuary. Hag's Head is another headland further up Clare's
north/western coastline, with the Cliffs of Moher along the coastline north of
the point.

Erris Head is the northwesternmost point of Connacht.

Apart from Ireland itself, Achill Island to its northwest is now considered
the largest island in the group. The island is inhabited, and is connected to
the mainland by a bridge.[24] Some of the next largest islands are the Aran
Islands, off the coast of southern Connacht, host to an Irish-speaking
community, or Gaeltacht. Valentia Island off the Iveragh peninsula is also one
of Ireland's larger islands, and is relatively settled, as well as being
connected by a bridge at its southeastern end. Omey Island, off the coast of
Connemara is a tidal island.

Some of the best-known peninsulas in Ireland are in County Kerry; the Dingle
peninsula, the aforementioned Iveragh peninsula and the Beara peninsula. The
Ards peninsula is one of the larger peninsulas outside Kerry. The Inishowen
peninsula in County Donegal includes Ireland's most northerly point, Malin
Head and several important towns including Buncrana on Lough Swilly,
Carndonagh and Moville on Lough Foyle. Ireland's most northerly land feature
is Inishtrahull island, off Malin Head. Rockall Island may deserve this honour
but its status is disputed, being claimed by the United Kingdom, Republic of
Ireland, Denmark (for the Faroe Islands) and Iceland. The most southerly point
is the Fastnet Rock.

The Hebrides off Scotland and Anglesey off Wales were grouped with Ireland
("Hibernia") by the Greco-Roman geographer Ptolemy,[25] but this is no longer
common.

The climate of Ireland is mild, moist and changeable with abundant rainfall
and a lack of temperature extremes. Ireland's climate is defined as a
temperate oceanic climate, or _Cfb_ on the Köppen climate classification
system, a classification it shares with most of northwest Europe.[26][27] The
country receives generally warm summers and mild winters. It is considerably
warmer than other areas at the same latitude on the other side of the
Atlantic, such as in Newfoundland, because it lies downwind of the Atlantic
Ocean. It is also warmer than maritime climates near the same latitude, such
as the Pacific Northwest as a result of heat released by the Atlantic
overturning circulation that includes the North Atlantic Current and Gulf
Stream. For comparison, Dublin is 9 °C warmer than St. John's in Newfoundland
in winter and 4 °C warmer than Seattle in the Pacific Northwest in winter.[28]

The influence of the North Atlantic Current also ensures the coastline of
Ireland remains ice-free throughout the winter.[29] The climate in Ireland
does not experience extreme weather, with tornadoes and similar weather
features being rare.[30][31] However, Ireland is prone to eastward moving
cyclones which come in from the North Atlantic.[32]

The prevailing wind comes from the southwest, breaking on the high mountains
of the west coast.[27] Rainfall is therefore a particularly prominent part of
western Irish life, with Valentia Island, off the west coast of County Kerry,
getting almost twice as much annual rainfall as Dublin on the east (1,400 mm
or 55.1 in vs. 762 mm or 30.0 in).[33]

January and February are the coldest months of the year, and mean daily air
temperatures fall between 4 and 7 °C (39.2 and 44.6 °F) during these months.
July and August are the warmest, with mean daily temperatures of 14 to 16 °C
(57.2 to 60.8 °F), whilst mean daily maximums in July and August vary from 17
to 18 °C (62.6 to 64.4 °F) near the coast, to 19 to 20 °C (66.2 to 68.0 °F)
inland. The sunniest months are May and June, with an average of five to seven
hours sunshine per day.[34]

Though extreme weather events in Ireland are comparatively rare when compared
with other countries in the European Continent, they do occur. Atlantic
depressions, occurring mainly in the months of December, January and February,
can occasionally bring winds of up to 160 km/h or 99 mph to Western coastal
counties; while the summer months, and particularly around late July/early
August, thunderstorms can develop.[35][36][37]

The table shows mean climate figures for the Dublin Airport weather station
over a thirty-year period. Climate statistics based on the counties of
Northern Ireland vary slightly but are not significantly different.[38]

Ireland is divided into four provinces, Connacht, Leinster, Munster and
Ulster, and 32 counties.[41] Six of the nine Ulster counties form Northern
Ireland and the other 26 form the state, Ireland. The map shows the county
boundaries for all 32 counties.

**Northern Ireland**

From an administrative viewpoint, 21 of the counties in the republic are units
of local government. The other six have more than one local council area,
producing a total of 31 county-level authorities. County Tipperary had two
ridings, North Tipperary and South Tipperary, originally established in 1838,
renamed in 2001[42] and amalgamated in 2014.[43] The cities of Dublin, Cork
and Galway have city councils and are administered separately from the
counties bearing those names. The cities of Limerick and Waterford were merged
with their respective county councils in 2014 to form new city and county
councils. The remaining part of County Dublin is divided into Dún
Laoghaire–Rathdown, Fingal, and South Dublin.[41]

Electoral areas in Ireland (the state), called constituencies in accordance
with Irish law, mostly follow county boundaries. Maintaining links to the
county system is a mandatory consideration in the re-organisation of
constituency boundaries by a Constituency Commission.[44]

In Northern Ireland, a major re-organisation of local government in 1973
replaced the six traditional counties and two county boroughs (Belfast and
Derry) by 26 single-tier districts,[45] which, apart from Fermanagh cross the
traditional county boundaries. The six counties and two county-boroughs remain
in use for purposes such as Lieutenancy. In November 2005, proposals were
announced which would see the number of local authorities reduced to
seven.[46] The island's total population of approximately 6 million people is
concentrated on the east coast, particularly in Dublin and Belfast and their
surrounding areas.[47][48]

Ireland has 12,000 km² (4,633 miles²) of bogland,[49] consisting of two
distinct types, blanket bogs and raised bogs. Blanket bogs are the more
widespread of the two types. They are essentially a product of human activity
aided by the moist Irish climate. Blanket bogs formed on sites where Neolithic
farmers cleared trees for farming. As the land so cleared fell into disuse,
the soil began to leach and become more acidic, producing a suitable
environment for the growth of heather and rushes. The debris from these plants
accumulated and a layer of peat formed. One of the largest expanses of
Atlantic blanket bog in Ireland is to be found in County Mayo.[50]

Raised bogs are most common in the Shannon basin. They formed when depressions
left behind after the ice age filled with water to form lakes. Debris from
reeds in these lakes formed a layer at the bottom of the water. This
eventually choked the lakes and raised above the surface, forming raised
bogs.[51]

Since the 17th century, peat has been cut for fuel for domestic heating and
cooking and it is called turf when so used. The process accelerated as
commercial exploitation of bogs grew. In the 1940s, machines for cutting turf
were introduced and larger-scale exploitation became possible. In the
Republic, this became the responsibility of a semi-state company called Bord
na Móna. In addition to domestic uses, commercially extracted turf is used in
a number of industries, especially electricity generation[52] though peat is
being combined with biomass for dual-firing electricity generation.[53]

In recent years, the high level of bog being destroyed by cutting has raised
environmental concerns. The problem is particularly acute for raised bogs as
they yield a higher-grade fuel than blanket bogs. Plans are now in place in
both the Republic and Northern Ireland to conserve most of the remaining
raised bogs on the island.[54]

Ireland has major marine resources with a significant fishing industry in the
Atlantic Ocean. The Exclusive Economic Zone of the Republic of Ireland is
410,310 km2 (158,420 sq mi).

Offshore exploration for natural gas began in 1970.[55] The first major
discovery was the Kinsale Head gas field in 1971.[56] Next was the smaller
Ballycotton gas field in 1989,[55] and the Corrib gas field in 1996.[57]
Exploitation of the Corrib project has yet to get off the ground because the
controversial proposal to refine the gas onshore, rather than at sea has been
met with widespread opposition. Gas from these fields is pumped ashore and
used for both domestic and industrial purposes. The Helvick oil field,
estimated to contain over 28 million barrels (4,500,000 m3) of oil, is a 2000
discovery.[58] Ireland is the largest European producer of zinc with three
operating zinc-lead mines at Navan, Galmoy and Lisheen. Other mineral deposits
with actual or potential commercial value include gold, silver, gypsum, talc,
calcite, dolomite, roofing slate, limestone aggregate, building stone, sand
and gravel.[59]

In May 2007 the Department of Communications, Marine and Natural Resources
(now replaced by the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural
Resources) reported that there may be volumes over 130 billion barrels
(2.1×1010 m3) of petroleum and 50 trillion cubic feet (1,400 km3) of natural
gas in Irish waters[60] – worth trillions of Euro, if true. The minimum
'guaranteed' amount of oil in the Irish Atlantic waters is 10 billion barrels
(1.6×109 m3), worth over €450 billion. There are also areas of petroleum and
natural gas on shore, for example the Lough Allen basin, with 9.4 trillion
cubic feet (270 km3) of gas and 1.5 billion barrels (240,000,000 m3) of oil,
valued at €74.4 billion. Already some fields are being exploited, such as the
Spanish Point field, with 1.25 trillion cubic feet (35 km3) of gas and 206
million barrels (32,800,000 m3) of oil, valued at €19.6 billion. The Corrib
Basin is also quite large, worth anything up to €87 billion, while the Dunquin
gas field contains 25 trillion cubic feet (710 km3) of natural gas and 4.13
billion barrels (657,000,000 m3) of petroleum.[60]

In March 2012 the first commercial oil well was drilled 70 km off the Cork
coast by Providence Resources. The Barryroe oil well is yielding 3500 barrels
per day, at current oil prices at $120 a barrel Barryroe oil well is worth in
excess of €2.14bn annually.[61]

