**Haslingden** /ˈhæzlɪŋdən/ is a town in Rossendale, Lancashire, England. It
is 19 miles (31 km) north of Manchester. The name means 'valley of the
hazels'. At the time of the 2001 census the town had a population of 16,849.

Haslingden is the birthplace of the industrialist John Cockerill (1790–1840)
and the composer Alan Rawsthorne (1905–1971), and was the home for many years
of the Irish Republican leader, Michael Davitt (1846–1906). Haslingden Cricket
Club is a member of the Lancashire League.

Part of what is now Haslingden, along with that of the neighbouring towns of
Rawtenstall and beyond that Bacup were part of the Forest of Blackburnshire,
that part being the Forest of Rossendale. The Forest was a hunting park during
the late 13th and 14th centuries; 'Forest' referred to it being parkland
rather than being heavily wooded, as the forest declined much earlier, during
the Neolithic period.

Haslingden grew from a market town (a market was established in 1676) and
later a coaching station to a significant industrial borough during the period
of the Industrial Revolution. In particular with the mechanisation of the wool
and cotton spinning and weaving industries from the 18th to the 19th
centuries, and with the development of watermills, and later steam power.

In the 20th century the population declined from 19,000 in the 1911 census to
15,000 in the 1971 census. The 2001 census recorded a population of 16,849
living in the town.

Haslingden is notable for its stone quarrying, and Haslingden Flag (a quartz-
based sandstone) was exported throughout the country in the 19th century with
the opening up of the rail network. It was used in the paving of London,
including Trafalgar Square.

Flagstone is a type of sedimentary rock, relatively easy to split or quarry in
slabs, and hence ideal for paving. Locally it is also used for making fences
and roofing. There are Upper and Lower Haslingden Flagstones and the name is
given to layers of the stone that appear throughout the area (not only in
Haslingden) although the most spectacular examples are in the Rossendale
valley.

Like much of East Lancashire, Haslingden also has a long association with the
textile industry. From the 16th century, after the old Forest of Rossendale
was opened up to settlement, farmers raised sheep on the moorlands and made
woollen cloth. Initially this was small-scale and local but towards the end of
the 18th century cloth workers came together to work in small groups of
houses. At the same time advances in technology meant that the first mills
were appearing in the area. Most of these were small, water-powered buildings
and Haslingden, with its elevated situation, wasn't a natural place for the
development of these early mills. Locally they were situated lower down in the
river valleys, such as at nearby Helmshore.[1]

The long association with wool meant that Haslingden and the other Rossendale
towns were familiar with the processes of cloth production and so were able to
switch easily to cotton weaving. Cotton was better suited than wool to
industrialised spinning as its fibres were less likely to break than wool.
Cotton cloth manufacture quickly became a highly successful industry, and its
impact on the landscape and on the lives of its work force was enormous.
Cotton weaving in the new factories was largely unregulated and the workforce
kept almost at starvation levels. Hunger drove men and women to fight back,
and mobs attacked the power-looms that were seen to be the cause of the
decline in status of the work-force. In 1826 almost 3,000 people were reported
as 'attacking machinery' in Haslingden. A troop of cavalry was stationed in
the vicinity, and ring-leaders were arrested. It was reported from Haslingden
in the same year, 1826, that 'a great majority of the unemployed must
literally perish from extreme want'. By the 1850 steam power began to
supersede water-power, and mills grew in size.[2] Grudgingly a minimum wage
was introduced and through the efforts of reformers, the churches and a few
enlightened mill-owners conditions for factory workers slowly improved.
Conditions were still harsh, despite the whole Rossendale area being known as
the 'Golden Valley'. No longer dependent on the rivers as a source of energy,
the mill owners were freed to build elsewhere, and Haslingden began to find
that successful mills, such as Hargreaves Street Mill, could be built on its
higher land.[3]

The long decline of the cotton industry began in the early years of the 20th
century. During the First World War, India and Japan were able to develop
their own industries, and after the Second World War, immigration - mainly
from Pakistan \- was encouraged to help bolster a failing industry. But by the
1950s, mills were closing at an ever-faster rate. The old buildings often re-
occupied by small businesses specialising in other occupations.

In the nineteenth century when the Cotton Industry was thriving it became a
magnet for immigrants who, for various reasons, had arrived in Britain. In
particular the port of Liverpool was a gateway for waves of immigrants and
many of these were attracted by work in the mills. From the late 1840s a large
influx of Irish immigrants forced out of Ireland by the Great Famine of
1846-1852, came to Lancashire and some ended up in Haslingden.[4] At almost
the same time, as a result of the political instability in Italy, Italians
came to Liverpool and Manchester and a few families moved on to Haslingden.
Similarly, various eastern European refugees fleeing Nazi persecution, settled
in the area. Immediately after the war young women from Germany were brought
over to work in the mills, and a few came to Haslingden and stayed.[5]

From 1950 onwards migrants were encouraged to travel from Commonwealth
countries to work in the post-war textile industry. Initially this tended to
mean young men who travelled from Pakistan, and later Bangladesh, fully
expecting to return home after building up their savings. But by the 1970s,
many were joined by wives and families and settled permanently in Haslingden.
As a result, the town is now home to a substantial and vibrant community of
people from a South Asian heritage, mainly Bangladeshi and Pakistani. Many of
the families come from just a few villages - from the Attock and Mirpur areas
of north-west Pakistan, and from Patli Union in the Sylhet region of
Bangladesh.[6]

The town now houses two mosques and a considerable number of Asian grocers and
other shops. There is also Apna (Rossendale) that provides classes, workshops
and a meeting place mainly for South Asian women. It is based at the Dave
Pearson Studio, and has a focus on Islamic arts, well-being, health and
general education.[7][8]

A civil parish was created in 1866 from the township of Haslingden in the
ancient parish of Whalley.[9] A local board was formed for the town in 1875
and the district it governed was extended to cover parts of the townships of
Henheads, Higher and Lower Booths in the parish of Whalley, and Musbury and
part of Tottington in the ancient parish of Bury.[10] Subsequently, Haslingden
was incorporated as a municipal borough in 1891 and in 1894 the civil parish
was extended to match the borders of the borough.[9][10] Following the local
government reorganisation in 1974 Haslingden became part of the Borough of
Rossendale.

Haslingden's Anglican parish church, St. James', was built in the 18th century
on a site occupied by a church building since at least 1284. In that year a
deed of gift of the Earl of Lincoln to the monks of Stanlaw granted them the
parish of Whalley. The church is considered to be the highest parish church
above sea level in England.[ _citation needed_ ] When they later took
possession and had a valuation of its assets done, they recorded at Haslingden
one of the parish's seven independent chapelries. Beside the Memorial Gardens,
the Manchester Road Methodist Church is a classic building with an Italian-
inspired interior.

The Public Hall was opened in 1868 and built by a private company formed by
'gentlemen representing the working classes and temperance movement'. It was
bought by the town council in 1898 but is now largely unused. Used for 50 or
more years by Rossendale Amateur Operatic Society, and other local groups, the
hall was closed by Rossendale Council in 2005 after an audit commission found
them to be the worst council in the country and this was shown in the
published league tables of the time.[ _citation needed_ ] The hall has since
been sold by the council to a group representing the Asian heritage community
and is in the process of being turned into a mosque (2009/ 2010). The public
hall was once a venue of Winston Churchill during his early political career.
Emmeline Pankhurst once addressed the people of Haslingden from the stage and,
after the Battle of the Somme in 1916, it was a temporary hospital for the
survivors of the Accrington Pals who were sent home for treatment.

The Wesleyan School formerly on the site of the current health centre was the
first site in the world to introduce standardised intelligence tests for five-
to six-year-olds.[11] Haslingden High School is a specialist arts,maths and
computing college. Haslingden Primary School was last inspected by Ofsted on
11 March 2014 and received a grading of 'Good'. [12]

Originally Haslingden Mechanics' Institute and opened in 1860, it became the
public library in 1905. A blue plaque commemorates Michael Davitt. The young
Davitt migrated to Haslingden with his family in 1840 as a result of the
family being evicted from their tenant farm by cruel a British Landlord. He
began working in a cotton mill but at the age of 11 his right arm was
entangled in a cogwheel and mangled so badly it had to be amputated. When he
recovered from his operation a local benefactor, John Dean, helped to give him
an education. He also started night classes at the Mechanics' Institute and
used its library. Michael Davitt's family home from 1867–1870 on Wilkinson
Street is now marked by a memorial plaque. Amongst the library's collection is
a early photograph (c. 1892) of Thomas Frederick Worrall labelled _Tom
Worrall, artist_ , whose watercolours included a depiction of the Old White
Horse Inn (long demolished).

Haslingden was once connected to Accrington and Bury by railway (Rush, 1983).
The East Lancashire Railway built a station here, which remained open to
passengers under British Railways until 7 November 1960 and to goods until 2
November 1964. The withdrawal of the passenger service was therefore not a
victim of Dr. Beeching. The Bury – Accrington line itself remained in use
until December 1966. Much of the trackbed of the railway is no longer visible,
with the A56 by-pass built over it between Grane Road and Blackburn Road,
however, the line can still be traced through Helmshore towards Stubbins where
several magnificent viaducts still remain. The East Lancashire Railway
Preservation Society was originally established at Helmshore Station in the
mid 1960s with the aim of reopening the railway line to Stubbins, the project
was abandoned with the organisation relocating to Bury in the 1970s and
eventually reopening the Rawtenstall to Bury line.

The town centre is home to the famous Big Lamp originally erected in 1841 and
from where all distances in Haslingden are measured, although the original
lamp has been replaced by a replica, the original being lost after being taken
to America. Cissy Green's Bakery can be found on Deardengate. People visit
from across Lancashire to sample the handmade pies which are still made to the
original 1920s recipe. To the north of the town is the Holland's Pies factory,
and Winfield's, a large warehouse-style retail development selling footwear
and clothing, and promoting itself as a family day out. Haslingden's War
Memorial is unusual in that it has no names recorded on it. To the northeast
there is a 2 kW digital television transmitter serving a wide area.

There is an extensive area of moorland to the west of Haslingden. These moors
are divided into Oswaldtwistle Moor and Haslingden Moor. The area forms part
of the West Pennine Moors. Plans were made in 2007 to build a wind farm
consisting of twelve wind turbines on the moors. This attracted both support
and opposition, but the plan was approved by councillors in 2010.[13] Further
developments have yet to take place, and the plan remains controversial.

The nearby Snighole ( _eel-hole_ ) in Helmshore is a well-known beauty spot.
The Grane Valley including three reservoirs to the west of the town is popular
with walkers.

Victoria Park has a bowling green, children's playground, skateboard park and
ball court. The top of the park affords views of Musbury Hill.

The Panopticons competition was launched in May 2003 by RIBA Competitions. The
Halo artwork designed by John Kennedy was selected and opened in 2007 and is
sited in the hills above Haslingden as the centrepiece of a reclaimed
landscape. It glows at night with an impressive viewpoint.

