The geology of the Ohio River, with a but a single series of rapids halfway in
its length from the confluence of the Monongahela and Allegheny rivers to its
union with the Mississippi, made it inevitable that a town would grow on the
site. Louisville, Kentucky was chartered in the late 18th century. From its
early days on the frontier, it quickly grew to be a major trading and
distribution center in the mid 19th century, important industrial city in the
early 20th, declined in the mid 20th century, before revitalizing in the late
20th century as a culturally-focused mid-sized American city.

The **history of Louisville, Kentucky** spans a bit over two centuries since
the latter part of the 18th century. Prior to arrival of Europeans, the region
was depopulated from the Beaver Wars of the 17th century, and no permanent
Native American settlements existed in the area. It was used as hunting
grounds by northern Shawnee and southern Cherokee. The area's geography and
location on the Ohio River attracted people from the earliest times. The city
is located at the Falls of the Ohio River, then a part of Kentucky County,
Virginia. The rapids created a barrier to river travel, and settlements grew
up at this portage point. The earliest European settlements were during the
latter stages of the American Revolutionary War by Virginian soldiers under
George Rogers Clark, first at Corn Island in 1778, then Fort-on-Shore and Fort
Nelson on the mainland. The town was chartered in 1780 and named Louisville in
honor of King Louis XVI of France. That year it received an influx of 300
settlers.

In 2003, the city of Louisville merged with Jefferson County to become
Louisville-Jefferson Metro. As of the 2010 census, it is the largest city in
the state of Kentucky, the second largest on the Ohio River, and 29th largest
city in the nation.

Notable residents of the city have included inventor Thomas Edison, U.S.
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis, boxing legend Muhammad Ali, newscaster
Diane Sawyer, actors Victor Mature, Ned Beatty and Tom Cruise, actresses Sean
Young and Jennifer Lawrence, singer Nicole Scherzinger, R&B singer Bryson
Tiller, the Speed family (including U.S. Attorney General James Speed and
Abraham Lincoln's close friend Joshua Fry Speed), the Bingham family,
industrialist/politician James Guthrie, U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell, and contemporary writers Hunter S. Thompson and Sue Grafton.

Notable events occurring in the city include the largest exhibition
installation to date (in 1883) and first large space lighted by Edison's light
bulb, and the first library in the South made accessible to African
Americans.[1][2] Medical advances included the 1999 first human hand
transplant in the United States[3] and the first self-contained artificial
heart transplant in 2001.[4]

There was a continuous indigenous human occupation of the area that became
Louisville from at least 1,000 BCE until roughly 1650 CE, when the Beaver Wars
resulted in depopulation of much of the Ohio River region. The Iroquois
maintained this area as a hunting ground by conquest.

Archeologists have identified several late and one early Archaic sites in
Jefferson County's wetlands. One of the most extensive finds was at McNeeley
Lake Cave; many others were found around what is now the Louisville
International Airport area. People of the Adena culture and the Hopewell
tradition that followed it lived in the area, with hunting villages along Mill
Creek and a large village near what became Zorn Avenue, on bluffs overlooking
the Ohio River. Archeologists have found 30 Jefferson County sites associated
with the Fort Ancient and Mississippian cultures, which were active from 1,000
AD until about 1650. The Louisville area was on the eastern border of the
Mississippian culture, which extended through the Mississippi Valley and its
tributaries. Regional chiefdoms built dense villages and cities characterized
by extensive earthwork mounds arranged around central plazas.[5]

When European and English explorers and settlers began entering Kentucky in
the mid-18th century, there were no permanent Native American settlements in
the region. The country was used as hunting grounds by Shawnee from the north
and Cherokee from the south.[6]

The account of the first European to visit the area, the French explorer,
René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle in 1669, is disputed and not supported
by facts. La Salle travelled along the St. Lawrence River to Lake Ontario,
then to Lake Erie. The two priests traveling with his party departed the group
at that point, and the written documentation of the expedition apparently
ceased. Reports of what occurred differ, including abandonment of the journey
due to illness, or traveling onward but not to the Ohio River. La Salle did
not claim to discover the Ohio River on that voyage nor travel to the falls
(of the Ohio).[7] The "discovery" of the Louisville area in 1669 is thus
perhaps better assigned to myth or legend. Subsequently, La Salle explored
areas of the Mississippi river valley and lower Great Lakes region from the
Gulf of Mexico up to modern-day Canada, claiming much of this land for
France.[8]

In 1751, the English colonist Christopher Gist explored areas along the Ohio
River. Following the defeat of France in the French and Indian War (part of
the Seven Years' War in Europe), it ceded control of its territory east of the
Mississippi River to Britain.

In 1769, British colonist Daniel Boone created a trail from North Carolina to
Tennessee. He spent the next two years exploring Kentucky. In 1773, Captain
Thomas Bullitt led the first exploring party into Jefferson County, surveying
land on behalf of Virginians who had been awarded land grants for service in
the French and Indian War.[9] In 1774, James Harrod began constructing Fort
Harrod in Kentucky. However, battles with the Native American tribes
established in the area forced these new settlers to retreat. They returned
the following year, as Boone built the Wilderness Road and established Fort
Boonesborough at a site near Boonesborough, Kentucky. The Native Americans
allocated a tract of land between the Ohio River and the Cumberland River for
the Transylvania Land Company. In 1776, the colony of Virginia declared the
Transylvania Land Company illegal and created the county of Kentucky in
Virginia from the land involved.

Col. George Rogers Clark made the first Anglo-American settlement in the
vicinity of modern-day Louisville in 1778, during the American Revolutionary
War. He was conducting a campaign against the British in areas north of the
Ohio River, then called the Illinois Country. Clark organized a group of 150
soldiers, known as the Illinois Regiment, after heavy recruiting in Virginia
and Pennsylvania. On May 12, they set out from Redstone, today's Brownsville,
Pennsylvania, taking along 80 civilians who hoped to claim fertile farmland
and start a new settlement in Kentucky. They arrived at the Falls of the Ohio
on May 27. It was a location Clark thought ideal for a communication post. The
settlers helped Clark conceal the true reason for his presence in the
area.[10][11]

The regiment helped the civilians establish a settlement on what came to be
called Corn Island, clearing land, and building cabins and a springhouse. On
June 24, Clark took his soldiers and left to begin their military
campaign.[12] A year later, at the request of Clark, the settlers crossed the
river and established the first permanent settlement on the mainland. By
April, they called it "Louisville", in honor of King Louis XVI of France,
whose government and soldiers aided colonists in the Revolutionary War.[13]
Today, George Rogers Clark is recognized as the European-American founder of
Louisville; many landmarks have been named for him.

During its earliest history, the colony of Louisville and the surrounding
areas suffered from Indian attacks, as Native Americans tried to push out the
encroaching colonists. As the Revolutionary War was still being waged, all
early residents lived within forts, as suggested by the earliest government of
Kentucky County, Virginia. The initial fort, at the northern tip of today's
12th street, was called Fort-on-Shore.[14] In response to the threat of
British attacks, particularly Bird's invasion of Kentucky, a larger fort
called Fort Nelson was built north of today's Main Street between Seventh and
Eighth streets, covering nearly an acre. The GB￡15,000 contract was given to
Richard Chenoweth, with construction beginning in late 1780 and completed by
March 1781. The fort, thought to be capable of resisting cannon fire, was
considered the strongest in the west after Fort Pitt. Due to decreasing need
for strong forts after the Revolutionary War, it was in decline by the end of
the decade.[15]

In 1780, the Virginia General Assembly and then-Governor Thomas Jefferson
approved the town charter of Louisville on May 1. Clark recruited early
Kentucky pioneer James John Floyd, who was placed on the town's board of
trustees and given the authority to plan and lay out the town.[16][17]
Jefferson County, named after Thomas Jefferson, was formed at this time as one
of three original Kentucky counties from the old Kentucky County, Virginia.
Louisville was the county seat.[18]

Also, during 1780, three hundred families migrated to the area, the town's
first fire department was established, and the first street plan of Louisville
was laid out by Willian Pope. Daniel Brodhead opened the first general store
here in 1783. He became the first to move out of Louisville's early forts.
Jonathan Cessna built the first house in newly platted Louisville. James John
Floyd became the first judge in 1783 but was killed later that year.[16] The
first courthouse was completed in 1784 as a 16 by 20-foot (6.1 m) log cabin.
By this time, Louisville contained 63 clapboard finished houses, 37 partly
finished, 22 uncovered houses, and over 100 log cabins. Shippingport,
incorporated in 1785, was a vital part of early Louisville, allowing goods to
be transported through the Falls of the Ohio. The first church was built in
1790, the first hotel in 1793, and the first post office in 1795.[19] During
the 1780s and early 1790s, the town did not grow as rapidly as Lexington in
central Kentucky. Factors were the threat of Indian attacks (ended in 1794 by
the Battle of Fallen Timbers), a complicated dispute over land ownership
between John Campbell and the town's trustees (resolved in 1785), and Spanish
policies restricting American trade and travel down the Mississippi to New
Orleans. By 1800, the population of Louisville was 359 compared to Lexington's
1,759.[20]

From 1784 through 1792, a series of conventions were held to discuss the
separation of Kentucky from Virginia. On June 1, 1792, Kentucky became the
fifteenth state in the United States and Isaac Shelby was named the first
Governor.

In 1803, Meriwether Lewis and William Clark were commissioned by President
Thomas Jefferson to make an expedition across North America; they organized it
at the Falls of the Ohio and Louisville. The Lewis and Clark Expedition would
take the explorers across the western U.S., surveying the Louisiana Purchase,
and eventually to the Pacific Ocean.[21][22]

Since settlement, all people and cargo had arrived by flatboats and later
keelboats, both of which were non-motorized vessels, meaning that it was
prohibitively costly to send goods upstream (towards Pittsburgh and other
developed areas). This technical limitation, combined with the Spanish
decision in 1784 to close the Mississippi River below Vicksburg, Mississippi
to American ships, meant there was very little outside market for goods
produced early on in Louisville. This improved somewhat with Pinckney's
Treaty, which opened the river and made New Orleans a Free trade zone by
1798.[23]

However, most cargo was still being sent downstream in the early 19th century,
averaging 60,000 tons downstream to 6,500 tons upstream. Boats passing through
still had to unload all of their cargo before navigating the falls, a boon to
local businesses. The frontier days quickly fading, log houses and forts began
to disappear, and Louisville saw its first newspaper, the _Louisville Gazette_
in 1807 and its first theatre in 1808, and the first dedicated church building
in 1809. All of this reflected the 400% growth in population reported by the
1810 Census.[24]

The economics of shipping were about to change, however, with the arrival of
steamboats. The first, the _New Orleans_ arrived in 1811, traveling downstream
from Pittsburgh. Although it made the trip in record time, most believed its
use was limited, as they did not believe a steamboat could make it back
upriver against the current.[25] However, in 1815, the _Enterprise_, captained
by Henry Miller Shreve, became the first steamboat to travel from New Orleans
to Louisville, showing the commercial potential of the steamboat in making
upriver travel and shipping practical.[26]

Industry and manufacturing reached Louisville and surrounding areas,
especially Shippingport, at this time. Some steamboats were built in
Louisville and many early mills and factories opened. Other towns were
developing at the falls: New Albany, Indiana in 1813 and Portland in 1814,
each competing with Louisville to become the dominant settlement in the area.
Still, Louisville's population grew rapidly, tripling from 1810 to 1820. By
1830, it would surpass Lexington to become the state's largest city, and would
eventually annex Portland and Shippingport.[27]

In 1816 the Louisville Library Company, the city's first library, opened its
doors with a subscription-based service.[28] Also, in a series of events
ranging from 1798 to 1846, the University of Louisville was founded from the
Jefferson Seminary, Louisville Medical Institute and Louisville Collegiate
Institute.[29]

In response to great demand, the Louisville and Portland Canal was completed
in 1830. This allowed boats to circumvent the Falls of the Ohio and travel
through from Pittsburgh to New Orleans.[30] In response to several epidemics
and the increasing need to treat ill or injured river workers, Louisville
Marine Hospital was completed in 1825 on Chestnut Street, an area that is
today home to Louisville's Medical Center.[31]

In 1828, the population surpassed 7,000 and Louisville became Kentucky's first
city. John Bucklin was elected the first Mayor. The nearby towns of
Shippingport and Portland remained independent of Louisville for the time
being. City status gave Louisville some judicial authority and the ability to
collect more taxes, which allowed for the establishment of the state's first
public school in 1829.[32]

In 1831, Catherine Spalding moved from Bardstown to Louisville and established
Presentation Academy, a Catholic school for girls. She also established the
St. Vincent Orphanage, which was later renamed as St. Joseph Orphanage.[33]

Louisville's famous Galt House hotel—the first of three downtown buildings to
have that moniker—was erected in 1834. In 1839, a precursor to the modern
Kentucky Derby was held at Old Louisville's Oakland Race Course. Over 10,000
spectators attended the two-horse race, in which _Grey Eagle_ lost to
_Wagner_. This race occurred 36 years before the first Kentucky Derby. It was
a popular competition to test the quality of horses. Louisville became a
center for sales of horses and other livestock from the Bluegrass Region of
central Kentucky, where horse breeding became a major part of the economy and
traditions.

The Kentucky School for the Blind was founded in 1839, the third-oldest school
for the blind in the country. In 1847, William H. Gibson opened one of the
city's first schools for African Americans in the basement of the Methodist
church on Fourth and Green Streets.[34]

In 1840 William Burke Belknap the elder (1811–1884) started the Belknap
Hardware and Manufacturing Company on the banks of the Ohio River.[35]

In 1848, Zachary Taylor, resident of Jefferson County from childhood through
early adulthood and a hero of the Mexican–American War, was elected as the
12th President of the United States. He served only sixteen months in office
before dying in 1850 from acute gastroenteritis. He was buried in the east end
of Louisville at Zachary Taylor National Cemetery.

Following the 1850 Census, Louisville was reported as the nation's tenth
largest city, while Kentucky was reported as the eighth most populous state.

The Louisville and Nashville Railroad (L&N) Company was founded in 1850 by
James Guthrie, who also was involved in the founding of the University of
Louisville. When the railroad was completed in 1859, Louisville's strategic
location at the Falls of the Ohio became central to the city's development and
importance in the rail and water freight transportation business.

On August 6, 1855, a day dubbed Bloody Monday, election riots stemming from
the bitter rivalry between the Democrats and supporters of the Know-Nothing
Party broke out. Know-Nothing mobs rioted in Irish and German parts of the
city, destroying property by fires and killing numerous people.

Founded in 1858, the American Printing House for the Blind is the oldest
organization of its kind in the United States. Since 1879 it has been the
official supplier of educational materials for blind students in the U.S. It
is located on Frankfort Avenue in the Clifton neighborhood, adjacent to the
campus where the Kentucky School for the Blind moved in 1855.

Louisville had one of the largest slave trades in the United States before the
Civil War, and much of the city's initial growth is attributed to that trade.
Shifting agricultural needs produced an excess of slaves in Kentucky, and many
were sold from here and other parts of the Upper South to the Deep South. In
1820, the slave population was at its height at nearly 26% of the Kentucky
population, but by 1860, that proportion had dropped significantly, even
though this percentage still represented over 10,000 people. Through the
1850s, slave traders sold 2500–4000 slaves annually from Kentucky down
river.[36]

The expression "sold down the river" originated as a lament of eastern slaves
being split apart from their families in sales to Louisville. Slave traders
collected slaves there until they had enough to ship in a group via the Ohio
and Mississippi rivers down to the slave market in New Orleans. There slaves
were sold again to owners of cotton and sugar cane plantations.[37][38]

Louisville was the turning point for many enslaved blacks. If they could get
from there across the Ohio River, called the "River Jordan" by escaping
slaves, they had a chance for freedom in Indiana and other northern states.
They had to evade capture by bounty-seeking slave catchers, but many were
aided by the Underground Railroad to get further north for freedom.[39]

During the Civil War, Louisville was a major stronghold of Union forces, which
kept Kentucky firmly in the Union. It was the center of planning, supplies,
recruiting and transportation for numerous campaigns, especially in the
Western Theater. While the state of Kentucky officially declared its
neutrality early in the war, prominent Louisville attorney James Speed,
brother of President Abraham Lincoln's close friend Joshua Fry Speed, strongly
advocated keeping the state in the Union. Seeing Louisville's strategic
importance in the freight industry, General William Tecumseh Sherman formed an
army base in the city in the event that the Confederacy advanced.

In September 1862, Confederate General Braxton Bragg decided to take
Louisville, but changed his mind. There was lack of backup from General Edmund
Kirby Smith's forces. In addition, the decision to install Confederate
Governor Richard Hawes in the alternative government in Frankfort made people
think the state might change. In the summer of 1863, Confederate cavalry under
John Hunt Morgan invaded Kentucky from Tennessee and briefly threatened
Louisville, before swinging around the city into Indiana during Morgan's Raid.
In March 1864, Generals Sherman and Ulysses S. Grant met at the Galt House to
plan the spring campaign, which included the capture of Atlanta, Georgia. (As
of 2014[update], that this meeting actually occurred has fallen into
dispute.[40])

By the end of the war, Louisville itself had not been attacked once, although
it was surrounded by skirmishes and battles, including the Battle of
Perryville and the Battle of Corydon. The Unionists—most of whose leaders
owned slaves—felt betrayed by the abolitionist position of the Republican
Party. After 1865 returning Confederate veterans largely took political
control of the city, leading to the jibe that it joined the Confederacy after
the war was over.

During the postwar years, the Freedmen's Bureau opened a school, led by W. H.
Gibson, and a bank in the city to serve the now free and growing African
American population.[41] Confederate women organized in associations to ensure
the dead were buried in cemeteries, to identify missing men, and to build
memorials to the war and their losses. By the 1890s, the memorial movement
came under the control of the United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC) and
United Confederate Veterans (UCV), who promoted the "Lost Cause". Making
meaning after the war was another way of writing its history.[42] In 1895, in
one of their successes, a Confederate monument was erected near the University
of Louisville campus.

James Callahan and other area businessmen organized the Louisville, Harrods
Creek and Westport Railway in 1870 and continued construction through the Long
Depression before failing in 1879. Although the LHC&W never reached beyond
Harrods Creek, its service was continued by the L&N and contributed to growth
in the city's eastern suburbs, particularly after the LRC purchased and
electrified the track between Zane Avenue and Prospect in 1904.

The first Kentucky Derby was held on May 17, 1875, at the Louisville Jockey
Club track (later renamed to Churchill Downs). The Derby was originally
shepherded by Meriwether Lewis Clark, Jr., the grandson of William Clark of
the Lewis and Clark Expedition, and grandnephew of the city's founder George
Rogers Clark. Ten thousand spectators were present at the first Derby to watch
Aristides win the race.

On February 2, 1876, professional baseball launched the National League, and
the Louisville Grays were a charter member. While the Grays were a relatively
short-lived team, playing for only two years, they began a much longer lasting
relationship between the city and baseball. In 1883, John "Bud" Hillerich made
his first baseball bat from white ash in his father's wood shop. The first bat
was produced for Pete "The Gladiator" Browning of the Louisville Eclipse
(minor league team). The bats eventually become known by the popular name,
_Louisville Slugger_ , and the local company Hillerich & Bradsby rapidly
became one of the largest manufacturers of baseball bats and other sporting
equipment in the world. Today, Hillerich & Bradsby manufactures over one
million wooden bats per year, accounting for about two of three wooden bats
sold worldwide.

In 1877 the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary relocated to Louisville from
Greenville, South Carolina, where it had been founded in 1859. Its new campus,
at Fourth and Broadway downtown, was underwritten by a group of Louisville
business leaders, including the Norton family, eager to add the promising
graduate-professional school to the city's resources. It grew quickly,
attracting students from all parts of the nation, and by the early 20th
century it was the second largest accredited seminary in the United States. It
relocated to its present 100-acre (0.40 km2) campus on Lexington Road in 1926.

In February 1882, Oscar Wilde lectured in the city and on that occasion met
Emma Speed Keats, the niece of his poetical hero (John Keats), who had settled
in the city. She was the daughter of Keats' brother George Keats and she later
sent Wilde an autograph manuscript by Keats of his poem 'Sonnet on Blue'.

On August 1, 1883, U.S. President Chester A. Arthur opened the first annual
Southern Exposition, a series of World's Fairs that would run for five
consecutive years adjacent to Central Park in what is now Old Louisville.
Highlighted at the show was the largest to-date installation of incandescent
light bulbs, having been recently invented by Thomas Edison, a former
resident.

Downtown Louisville began a modernization period in the 1890s, with
Louisville's second skyscraper, the Columbia Building, opening on January 1,
1890.[43] The following year, famous landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted
was commissioned to design Louisville's system of parks (most notably,
Cherokee, Iroquois and Shawnee Parks) connected by tree-lined parkways.
Passenger train service arrived in the city on September 7, 1891, with the
completion of the Union Station train hub. The first train arrived at 7:30 am.
Louisville's Union Station was then recognized as the largest train station in
the South.

Interrupting these developments, on March 27, 1890, a major tornado measuring
F4 on the Fujita scale visited Louisville. The "whirling tiger of the air"
carved a path from the Parkland neighborhood all the way to Crescent Hill,
destroying 766 buildings ($2½ million worth of property) and killing an
estimated 74 to 120 people. At least 55 of those deaths occurred when the
Falls City Hall collapsed. This is one of the highest death tolls due to a
single building collapse from a tornado in U.S. history.

In 1893, two Louisville sisters, Patty and Mildred J. Hill, both
schoolteachers, wrote the song "Good Morning to All" for their kindergarten
class. The song did not become popular, and the lyrics were later changed to
the more recognizable, "Happy Birthday to You". This is now the most performed
song in the English language.

Also in 1893, the Louisville Presbyterian Seminary was founded, building a
handsome campus at First and Broadway downtown (now occupied by Jefferson
Community College). Eight years later, it absorbed an older Presbyterian
seminary in Danville, Kentucky. In 1963 Louisville Seminary relocated to a
modern campus on Alta Vista Road near Cherokee Park.

In the early 20th century, controversy over political corruption came to a
head in the 1905 Mayor election, called the most corrupt in city history. An
anti-corruption party unique to Louisville, called themselves the Fusionists,
briefly emerged at this time. Democratic boss John Whallen succeeded in
getting his candidate, Paul C. Barth, elected, but the results were overturned
in 1907. Elections gradually became less corrupt, but political machines would
still hold considerable power for decades.

The Waverly Hills Sanatorium was opened in 1910 to house tuberculosis
patients. The hospital was closed in 1961. It was later used as a retirement
home (1963–1982). It was unused for more than a decade until 1991, when it was
reopened for tours.

During World War I, Louisville became home to Camp Taylor. In 1917, the
English-bred colt "Omar Khayyam" became the first foreign-bred horse to win
the Kentucky Derby. Two years later, in 1919, Sir Barton became the first
horse to win the Triple Crown, though the term for the three prime races did
not come into use for another 11 years.

In 1920, Louisville's first zoo was founded at Senning's Park (present-day
Colonial Gardens), next to Iroquois Park. Barely surviving through the Great
Depression, it closed in 1939. Its successor, the current Louisville Zoo, did
not open until 1969.[44][45]

In 1923, the Brown Hotel's chef Fred K. Schmidt introduced the Hot Brown
sandwich in the hotel restaurant, consisting of an open-faced "sandwich" of
turkey and bacon smothered with cheese and tomato.[46] The Hot Brown became
rather popular among locals and visitors alike, and can be ordered by many
local restaurants in the area today.

The Belle of Louisville, today recognized as the oldest river steamboat in
operation, came to Louisville in 1931. That same year, the Louisville
Municipal College for Negroes was established to allow black Louisvillians to
attend classes. (The college was dissolved into the University of Louisville
with the ending of segregation in 1951.)

On March 28, 1936, the river reached a level of 60.6 feet, flooding parts of
the city.[47] In late January and February 1937, a month of heavy rain
throughout the Ohio River Valley prompted what became remembered as the "Great
Flood of '37". The flood submerged about 70 percent of the city and forced the
evacuation of 175,000 residents. In Louisville, 90 people died. At the crest
on January 27, 1937, the waters reached 30 feet (9.1 m) above flood level in
Louisville. Photojournalist Margaret Bourke-White documented the flood and its
aftermath in a series of famous photos. Later, flood walls were installed to
prevent another such disaster.

Standiford Field was built in Louisville by the Army Corps of Engineers in
1941. Bowman Field, a smaller airport, had been previously opened in 1919.

Louisville was a center for factory war production during World War II. In May
1942, the U.S. government assigned the Curtiss-Wright Aircraft Company a war
plant located at Louisville's air field for wartime aircraft production. The
factory produced the C-46 Commando cargo plane, among other aircraft. In 1946
the factory was sold to International Harvester, which began large-scale
production of tractors and agricultural equipment. Otter Creek Park was given
to Louisville by the U.S. Government in 1947, in recognition of the city's
service during World War II.

Throughout the 20th century, the arts flourished in Louisville. The Speed Art
Museum was opened in 1927 and is now the oldest and largest museum of art in
Kentucky. The Louisville Orchestra was founded in 1937. In 1949 the Kentucky
Shakespeare Festival was begun, and today it is the oldest free and
independently-operating Shakespeare festival in the United States. The
Kentucky Opera was started in 1952, and the Louisville Ballet was founded that
same year, though it only achieved professional status in 1975. In 1956 the
Kentucky Derby Festival was started to celebrate the annual Kentucky Derby.
The next year, in 1957, the St. James Court Art Show was started. Both these
are still popular festivals in the region.

Eight whiskey distilleries opened on 7th Street Road after the end of
prohibition, and Louisville attempted to annex them to increase its tax base.
Not wanting to pay city taxes, the whiskey companies persuaded the Kentucky
General Assembly to pass the Shively Bill, which made it much more difficult
for Louisville to annex additional areas. The distilleries used Kentucky's
existing laws (which favored the mostly rural communities in the state) to
form a ½ square-mile city named Shively in 1938. Shively grew to include
residential areas.

In 1946 the General Assembly passed a law allowing the formation of a
Metropolitan Sewer District, and Louisville's Board of Aldermen approved its
creation a few months later. With the expansion of sewer service outside of
traditional city limits and laws hindering Louisville's annexation attempts,
areas outside of the city limits that were developed during the building boom
after World War II became cities in their own right. This status prevented
their annexation by Louisville. As a result, Louisville's population figures
leveled off. The incorporation of such several new communities contributed to
the defeat of Louisville's attempt to merge with Jefferson County in 1956.
Louisville continued fighting to annex land to grow.[48]

For a variety of reasons, Louisville began to decline as an important city in
the 1960s and 1970s. Highways built in the late 1950s facilitated movement by
the expanding middle class to newer housing being developed in the suburbs.
With the loss in population, the downtown area began to decline economically.
Many formerly popular buildings became vacant. Even the previously strong
Brown Hotel closed its doors in 1971 (although it later reopened). Fontaine
Ferry Park, Louisville's most popular amusement park during the early 20th
century, closed in 1969 as people's tastes for entertainment changed.

The once-strong farmer's market, Haymarket, ceased operations in 1962 after 71
years of operation. The final death-knell for the Haymarket, already in
decline due to changing economic trends, was the construction of an Interstate
65 ramp through the main part of the open-air market. Not only did interstates
facilitate suburban living, they sliced through older city neighborhoods and
often divided them irreversibly.

Another major (F4) tornado hit on April 3, 1974, as part of the 1974 Super
Outbreak of tornadoes that struck 13 states. It covered 21 miles (34 km) and
destroyed several hundred homes in the Louisville area but was only
responsible for 2 deaths. It also caused extensive damage in Cherokee Park.

Despite these signs of decline, a number of activities were taking place that
presaged the Louisville Renaissance of the 1980s.

Southeast Christian Church, today one of the largest megachurches in the U.S.,
was founded in 1962 with only 53 members. In 1964, Actors Theatre of
Louisville was founded. It was later designated the "State Theater of
Kentucky" in 1974. It has created a strong regional theater.

In 1973, the racehorse Secretariat made the fastest time ever run in the Derby
(at its present distance) at 1 minute 59⅖ seconds. Excitement over him raised
interest in the Derby.

There were signs of revival in the 1970s. Throughout the decade, new buildings
came under construction downtown, and many historic buildings were renovated.
Louisville's public transportation, Transit Authority of River City, began
operating a bus line in 1974. And in 1981 the Falls of the Ohio was granted
status as a Federal conservation area.

On the downside, in the early morning hours of February 13, 1981, sewer
explosions ripped through the southern part of Old Louisville and near the
University of Louisville. The cause was traced back to chemical releases into
the sewer system from a nearby Ralston-Purina soybean processing facility.[49]

Louisville continued to struggle during the 1980s in its attempt to redevelop
and expand. It fought with other Jefferson County communities in two more
failed attempts to merge with county government in 1982 and 1983.[48] Barry
Bingham, Jr. sold the family business Standard Gravure in 1986, which sent the
company into a major restructuring in the following years. _The Courier-
Journal_ was one of the papers printed by Standard Gravure. On September 14,
1989, Joseph Wesbecker, on medical leave due to mental illness and work-
related stress, entered the Courier-Journal building and shot and killed eight
employees, injuring another twelve before killing himself.[50]

During the Civil Rights Movement in the late 1950s and through the 1960s,
Louisville was affected, as it had maintained a segregated society. Civil
rights groups had undertaken a variety of actions to challenge that. In
addition, black neighborhoods had declined during the economic downturn of the
city. Urban renewal efforts undertaken for ostensible improvements had
adversely affected the center of their neighborhood.[51]

After national civil rights legislation had passed in 1964 and 1965, energy
continued among African Americans to push for social changes. The National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) had for years had an
office in the Parkland neighborhood, which had an African-American majority
population. In Louisville, as in other cities, there was a political struggle
between the NAACP and more militant activists associated with Black Power. The
latter's attempt to organize people was one of the catalysts for the riot. In
addition, feelings were raw because Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had been
assassinated less than two months before.[51] On May 27, 1968, a group of 400
mostly African-Americans gathered for a protest in Parkland. They opposed
possible reinstatement of a white officer involved in an incident where
physical conflict had occurred in the arrest of two African-American men. The
group was organized by the Black Unity League of Kentucky, known as BULK. BULK
had announced that activist Stokely Carmichael was to come to Louisville to
speak, but he had no such plans.[51] When the crowd gathered, speakers spread
rumors that Carmichael's plane had been purposely delayed; protesters got
angry, and a disturbance began.[51]

The crowd's tossing bottles and looting forced the police to retreat. By
midnight, rioters had looted several stores in Downtown Louisville. Cars were
overturned and some burned. Mayor Kenneth A. Schmied ordered the 2,178
Kentucky National Guardsmen to help disperse the crowd.[51] The mayor also
issued a citywide curfew. 472 arrests were made during the riots, two African-
American teenage boys were killed, and over $200,000 in property damage was
done.[52] The National Guard remained in place until June 4, 1968.[53]
Following these events, the city's demographics changed dramatically; the city
became more racially segregated by neighborhoods, and more middle-class
people, of both races, moved to newer housing in the suburbs.

Despite the Supreme Court's ruling in _Brown v. Board of Education_ in 1954,
Louisville's public schools were still essentially segregated, especially as
regional residential segregation had become more pronounced due to other
economic changes. In 1971 and 1972 the Kentucky Civil Liberties Union, Legal
Aid Society, and NAACP filed suit in federal court to desegregate the
Louisville and Jefferson County school systems. The Kentucky Commission on
Human Rights also filed suit asking that desegregation be achieved through
merger of the Louisville, Jefferson County and Anchorage school systems, to
overcome residential segregation and the inability of the city to expand by
annexation and take in a more diverse area.[54] By February 28, 1975, the
state Board of Education ordered the merger of the Louisville and Jefferson
County schools systems effective April 1, 1975.[55]

On July 17, 1975, Judge James F. Gordon stipulated that a desegregation plan
would be implemented at the beginning of the 1975–76 school year, to begin
September 4, 1975. The school system used mandatory busing to distribute
students to integrate the newly merged school systems. The students were bused
according to the first initial of their last name and their grade level. The
busing was to achieve certain percentages of racial diversity in schools
regardless of where the students lived. In practical effects, the plan
required black students to be bused up to 10 of their 12 years in school, and
white students 2 of their 12 years. In 1978 the judge ended his supervision of
the project, but the decree remained in effect in some places. The school
system continued the busing system.[54] In the mid-1980s, the school system
restructured the plan to try to provide for more local schooling for students.
Guidelines remained in effect for percentages of the student population based
on ethnicity.

Since the 1980s, Louisville has had a revival in popularity and prosperity.
This can be seen in the many changes in this period, including a great deal of
downtown infrastructure.

The retail environment changed here and across the country. Woolworth went out
of business in 1990. The building in Louisville, designed by architect
Frederick W. Garber and completed in 1946, was demolished in 2004. The site
was not redeveloped at the time, but paved for a parking lot.[56][57][58]

Many cultural showcases were founded or expanded in this period. The Kentucky
Center for the Arts was officially dedicated in 1983. In 1984 the center
hosted one of the U.S. presidential election debates between candidates Ronald
Reagan and Walter Mondale. Today the Center hosts many touring plays and
performances by the Kentucky Opera and the Louisville Ballet. An IMAX theater
was added to the Kentucky Science Center in 1988. Phase I of the Louisville
Waterfront Park was completed in 1999, and Phase II was completed in 2004.
Though originally built as a standard movie theater in 1921, the Kentucky
Theater was reopened in 2000 as a performing arts venue.

In 1988, the Louisville Falls Fountain, the tallest computerized fountain in
the world, began operation on the Ohio River at Louisville. Its 420-foot (130
m) high spray (later reduced to 375 feet (114 m) due to energy costs) and
fleur-de-lis patterns graced Louisville's waterfront until the fountain was
shut down in 1998.

The headquarters of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the largest Presbyterian
denomination and a pillar of the religious "main line," moved to Louisville in
1988. The move was the result of a concerted campaign, led by Louisville
Presbyterian Theological Seminary president John Mulder, Louisville mayor
Jerry Abramson, and with a gift of waterfront buildings from Humana founder
David Jones.[59]

In communications, _The Courier-Journal_ , Louisville's primary local
newspaper, was purchased in 1987 by media giant Gannett. The _Louisville
Eccentric Observer_ (LEO), a popular alternative newspaper, was founded in
1990. _Velocity_ was later released by the _Courier-Journal_ to compete with
the _LEO_ in 2003.

In 2003, the city of Louisville and Jefferson County merged into a single
government named _Louisville-Jefferson County Metro Government_. This merger
made Louisville the 16th or 27th most populous city in the U.S., depending on
how the population is calculated. The change enabled consolidation of some
services and activities to provide better government for the region.

New changes and growth continued in the city. The entertainment and retail
district called Fourth Street Live! was opened in 2004, and the Muhammad Ali
Center was opened in 2005. Between the 1990 Census and 2000 Census,
Louisville's metro area population outgrew that of Lexington by 149,415, and
Cincinnati's by 23,278.

Since 1884, The Filson Historical Society (originally named the Filson Club),
with its extensive collections, has led the way in preserving Louisville's
history, and publishes articles in its quarterly journal.[60] The University
of Louisville and the Louisville Free Public Library have also maintained
extensive historical collections.[61]

As of 2016, Louisville does not have a museum dedicated to the city's history.
Various museums and historic homes present exhibits that interpret this
history. These include the Filson, Portland Museum, Historic Locust Grove,
Falls of the Ohio State Park interpretive center (Clarksville, Indiana),
Howard Steamboat Museum (Jeffersonville, Indiana), Carnegie Center for Art &
History (New Albany, Indiana), and the Thomas D. Clark Center for Kentucky
History (Frankfort).

