**Hydrogenation** – meaning, to treat with hydrogen – is a chemical reaction
between molecular hydrogen (H2) and another compound or element, usually in
the presence of a catalyst such as nickel, palladium or platinum. The process
is commonly employed to reduce or saturate organic compounds. Hydrogenation
typically constitutes the addition of pairs of hydrogen atoms to a molecule,
often an alkene. Catalysts are required for the reaction to be usable; non-
catalytic hydrogenation takes place only at very high temperatures.
Hydrogenation reduces double and triple bonds in hydrocarbons.[1]

It has three components, the unsaturated substrate, the hydrogen (or hydrogen
source) and, invariably, a catalyst. The reduction reaction is carried out at
different temperatures and pressures depending upon the substrate and the
activity of the catalyst.

The same catalysts and conditions that are used for hydrogenation reactions
can also lead to isomerization of the alkenes from cis to trans. This process
is of great interest because hydrogenation technology generates most of the
trans fat in foods (see § Food industry below). A reaction where bonds are
broken while hydrogen is added is called hydrogenolysis, a reaction that may
occur to carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom (oxygen, nitrogen or halogen)
bonds. Some hydrogenations of polar bonds are accompanied by hydrogenolysis.

For hydrogenation, the obvious source of hydrogen is H2 gas itself, which is
typically available commercially within the storage medium of a pressurized
cylinder. The hydrogenation process often uses greater than 1 atmosphere of
H2, usually conveyed from the cylinders and sometimes augmented by "booster
pumps". Gaseous hydrogen is produced industrially from hydrocarbons by the
process known as steam reforming.[2] For many applications, hydrogen is
transferred from donor molecules such as formic acid, isopropanol, and
dihydroanthracene. These hydrogen donors undergo dehydrogenation to,
respectively, carbon dioxide, acetone, and anthracene. These processes are
called transfer hydrogenations.

An important characteristic of alkene and alkyne hydrogenations, both the
homogeneously and heterogeneously catalyzed versions, is that hydrogen
addition occurs with "syn addition", with hydrogen entering from the least
hindered side.[3] This reaction can be performed on a variety of different
functional groups.

With rare exceptions, H2 is unreactive toward organic compounds in the absence
of metal catalysts. The unsaturated substrate is chemisorbed onto the
catalyst, with most sites covered by the substrate. In heterogeneous
catalysts, hydrogen forms surface hydrides (M-H) from which hydrogens can be
transferred to the chemisorbed substrate. Platinum, palladium, rhodium, and
ruthenium form highly active catalysts, which operate at lower temperatures
and lower pressures of H2. Non-precious metal catalysts, especially those
based on nickel (such as Raney nickel and Urushibara nickel) have also been
developed as economical alternatives, but they are often slower or require
higher temperatures. The trade-off is activity (speed of reaction) vs. cost of
the catalyst and cost of the apparatus required for use of high pressures.
Notice that the Raney-nickel catalysed hydrogenations require high
pressures:[7][8]

Catalysts are usually classified into two broad classes: homogeneous catalysts
and heterogeneous catalysts. Homogeneous catalysts dissolve in the solvent
that contains the unsaturated substrate. Heterogeneous catalysts are solids
that are suspended in the same solvent with the substrate or are treated with
gaseous substrate.

Some well known homogeneous catalysts are indicated below. These are
coordination complexes that activate both the unsaturated substrate and the
H2. Most typically, these complexes contain platinum group metals, especially
Rh and Ir.

Dichlorotris(triphenylphosphine)ruthenium(II) is a precatalyst based on
ruthenium.

Crabtree's catalyst is a highly active catalyst featuring iridium.

Rh2Cl2(cod)2 is a precursor to many homogeneous catalysts.

(S)-iPr-PHOX is a typical chelating phosphine ligand used in asymmetric
hydrogenation.

Homogeneous catalysts are also used in asymmetric synthesis by the
hydrogenation of prochiral substrates. An early demonstration of this approach
was the Rh-catalyzed hydrogenation of enamides as precursors to the drug
L-DOPA.[9] To achieve asymmetric reduction, these catalyst are made chiral by
use of chiral diphosphine ligands.[10] Rhodium catalyzed hydrogenation has
also been used in the herbicide production of S-metolachlor, which uses a
Josiphos type ligand (called Xyliphos).[11] In principle asymmetric
hydrogenation can be catalyzed by chiral heterogeneous catalysts,[12] but this
approach remains more of a curiosity than a useful technology.

Heterogeneous catalysts for hydrogenation are more common industrially. In
industry, precious metal hydrogenation catalysts are deposited from solution
as a fine powder on the support, which is a cheap, bulky, porous, usually
granular material, such as activated carbon, alumina, calcium carbonate or
barium sulfate.[13] For example, platinum on carbon is produced by reduction
of chloroplatinic acid _in situ_ in carbon. Examples of these catalysts are 5%
ruthenium on activated carbon, or 1% platinum on alumina. Base metal
catalysts, such as Raney nickel, are typically much cheaper and do not need a
support. Also, in the laboratory, unsupported (massive) precious metal
catalysts such as platinum black are still used, despite the cost.

As in homogeneous catalysts, the activity is adjusted through changes in the
environment around the metal, i.e. the coordination sphere. Different faces of
a crystalline heterogeneous catalyst display distinct activities, for example.
This can be modified by mixing metals or using different preparation
techniques. Similarly, heterogeneous catalysts are affected by their supports.

In many cases, highly empirical modifications involve selective "poisons".
Thus, a carefully chosen catalyst can be used to hydrogenate some functional
groups without affecting others, such as the hydrogenation of alkenes without
touching aromatic rings, or the selective hydrogenation of alkynes to alkenes
using Lindlar's catalyst. For example, when the catalyst palladium is placed
on barium sulfate and then treated with quinoline, the resulting catalyst
reduces alkynes only as far as alkenes. The Lindlar catalyst has been applied
to the conversion of phenylacetylene to styrene.[14]

Selective hydrogenation of the less hindered alkene group in carvone using a
homogeneous catalyst (Wilkinson's catalyst).[15]

Partial hydrogenation of phenylacetylene using the Lindlar catalyst.

Hydrogenation of an imine using a Raney nickel catalyst, a popular
heterogeneous catalyst.

Partial hydrogenation of a resorcinol derivative using a Raney-Nickel
catalyst.

Hydrogenation of maleic acid to succinic acid.[16]

Transfer hydrogenation uses other hydrogen donor molecules in place of H2
itself. These reactants, which can also serve as solvents for the reaction,
include hydrazine, dihydronaphthalene, dihydroanthracene, isopropanol, and
formic acid.[17] The reaction involves an outer-sphere mechanism.

In organic synthesis, transfer hydrogenation is useful for the asymmetric
reduction of polar unsaturated substrates, such as ketones, aldehydes, and
imines. The hydrogenation of polar substrates such as ketones and aldehydes
typically requires transfer hydrogenation, at least reactions that use
homogeneous catalysts. These catalysts are readily generated in chiral forms,
which is the basis of asymmetric hydrogenation of ketones.

Polar substrates such as nitriles can be hydrogenated electrochemically, using
protic solvents and reducing equivalents as the source of hydrogen.[18]

The addition of hydrogen to double or triple bonds in hydrocarbons is a type
of redox reaction that can be thermodynamically favorable. For example, the
addition of hydrogen to an alkene has a Gibbs free energy change of -101
kJ·mol−1.[10] However, the reaction rate for most hydrogenation reactions is
negligible in the absence of catalysts. Hydrogenation is a strongly exothermic
reaction. In the hydrogenation of vegetable oils and fatty acids, for example,
the heat released is about 25 kcal per mole (105 kJ/mol), sufficient to raise
the temperature of the oil by 1.6–1.7 °C per iodine number drop. The mechanism
of metal-catalyzed hydrogenation of alkenes and alkynes has been extensively
studied.[19] First of all isotope labeling using deuterium confirms the
regiochemistry of the addition:

On solids, the accepted mechanism is the Horiuti-Polanyi mechanism:[20][21]

In the second step, the metallointermediate formed is a saturated compound
that can rotate and then break down, again detaching the alkene from the
catalyst. Consequently, contact with a hydrogenation catalyst necessarily
causes _cis-trans_ -isomerization, because the isomerization is
thermodynamically favorable. This is a problem in partial hydrogenation, while
in complete hydrogenation the produced _trans_ -alkene is eventually
hydrogenated.

For aromatic substrates, the first bond is hardest to hydrogenate because of
the free energy penalty for breaking the aromatic system. The product of this
is a cyclohexadiene, which is extremely active and cannot be isolated; in
conditions reducing enough to break the aromatization, it is immediately
reduced to a cyclohexene. The cyclohexene is ordinarily reduced immediately to
a fully saturated cyclohexane, but special modifications to the catalysts
(such as the use of the anti-solvent water on ruthenium) can preserve some of
the cyclohexene, if that is a desired product.

In many homogeneous hydrogenation processes,[22] the metal binds to both
components to give an intermediate alkene-metal(H)2 complex. The general
sequence of reactions is assumed to be as follows or a related sequence of
steps:

The hydrogenation of nitrogen to give ammonia is conducted on a vast scale by
the Haber–Bosch process, consuming an estimated 1% of the world's energy
supply.

Oxygen can be partially hydrogenated to give hydrogen peroxide, although this
process has not been commercialized. One difficulty is preventing the
catalysts from triggering decomposition of the hydrogen peroxide to form
water.[23][24]

Catalytic hydrogenation has diverse industrial uses. Most frequently,
industrial hydrogenation relies on heterogeneous catalysts.[2]

The largest scale application of hydrogenation is for the processing of
vegetable oils.[2] Typical vegetable oils are derived from polyunsaturated
fatty acids (containing more than one carbon-carbon double bond). Their
partial hydrogenation reduces most, but not all, of these carbon-carbon double
bonds. The degree of hydrogenation is controlled by restricting the amount of
hydrogen, reaction temperature and time, and the catalyst.[25]

Hydrogenation converts liquid vegetable oils into solid or semi-solid fats,
such as those present in margarine. Changing the degree of saturation of the
fat changes some important physical properties, such as the melting range,
which is why liquid oils become semi-solid. Solid or semi-solid fats are
preferred for baking because the way the fat mixes with flour produces a more
desirable texture in the baked product. Because partially hydrogenated
vegetable oils are cheaper than animal fats, are available in a wide range of
consistencies, and have other desirable characteristics (such as increased
oxidative stability and longer shelf life), they are the predominant fats used
as shortening in most commercial baked goods.

A side effect of incomplete hydrogenation having implications for human health
is the isomerization of some of the remaining unsaturated carbon bonds to
their trans isomers. Trans fats (resulting from partial hydrogenation) have
been implicated in circulatory diseases including heart disease.[26] The
conversion from cis to trans bonds is chemically favored because the trans
configuration has lower energy than the natural cis one. At equilibrium, the
trans/cis isomer ratio is about 2:1. Many countries and regions have
introduced mandatory labeling of trans fats on food products and appealed to
the industry for voluntary reductions.[27][28][29] The food industry has moved
away from partially hydrogenated fats (i.e. trans fats) and towards fully
hydrogenated fats and interesterified fats in response to bad publicity about
trans fats, labeling requirements, and removal of trans fats from the FDA list
of foods Generally Recognized as Safe.[30][31][32]

In petrochemical processes, hydrogenation is used to convert alkenes and
aromatics into saturated alkanes (paraffins) and cycloalkanes (naphthenes),
which are less toxic and less reactive. Relevant to liquid fuels that are
stored sometimes for long periods in air, saturated hydrocarbons exhibit
superior storage properties. On the other hand, alkene tend to form
hydroperoxides, which can form gums that interfere with fuel handing
equipment. For example, mineral turpentine is usually hydrogenated.
Hydrocracking of heavy residues into diesel is another application. In
isomerization and catalytic reforming processes, some hydrogen pressure is
maintained to hydrogenolyze coke formed on the catalyst and prevent its
accumulation.

Hydrogenation is a useful means for converting unsaturated compounds into
saturated derivatives. Substrates include not only alkenes and alkynes, but
also aldehydes, imines, and nitriles,[33] which are converted into the
corresponding saturated compounds, i.e. alcohols and amines. Thus, alkyl
aldehydes, which can be synthesized with the oxo process from carbon monoxide
and an alkene, can be converted to alcohols. E.g. 1-propanol is produced from
propionaldehyde, produced from ethene and carbon monoxide. Xylitol, a polyol,
is produced by hydrogenation of the sugar xylose, an aldehyde. Primary amines
can be synthesized by hydrogenation of nitriles, while nitriles are readily
synthesized from cyanide and a suitable electrophile. For example, isophorone
diamine, a precursor to the polyurethane monomer isophorone diisocyanate, is
produced from isophorone nitrile by a tandem nitrile hydrogenation/reductive
amination by ammonia, wherein hydrogenation converts both the nitrile into an
amine and the imine formed from the aldehyde and ammonia into another amine.

The earliest hydrogenation is that of platinum catalyzed addition of hydrogen
to oxygen in the Döbereiner's lamp, a device commercialized as early as 1823.
The French chemist Paul Sabatier is considered the father of the hydrogenation
process. In 1897, building on the earlier work of James Boyce, an American
chemist working in the manufacture of soap products, he discovered that traces
of nickel catalyzed the addition of hydrogen to molecules of gaseous
hydrocarbons in what is now known as the Sabatier process. For this work,
Sabatier shared the 1912 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Wilhelm Normann was awarded
a patent in Germany in 1902 and in Britain in 1903 for the hydrogenation of
liquid oils, which was the beginning of what is now a worldwide industry. The
commercially important Haber–Bosch process, first described in 1905, involves
hydrogenation of nitrogen. In the Fischer–Tropsch process, reported in 1922
carbon monoxide, which is easily derived from coal, is hydrogenated to liquid
fuels.

In 1922, Voorhees and Adams described an apparatus for performing
hydrogenation under pressures above one atmosphere.[34] The Parr shaker, the
first product to allow hydrogenation using elevated pressures and
temperatures, was commercialized in 1926 based on Voorhees and Adams' research
and remains in widespread use. In 1924 Murray Raney developed a finely
powdered form of nickel, which is widely used to catalyze hydrogenation
reactions such as conversion of nitriles to amines or the production of
margarine.

In the 1930s, Calvin discovered that copper(II) complexes oxidized H2. The
1960s witnessed the development of well defined homogeneous catalysts using
transition metal complexes, e.g., Wilkinson's catalyst (RhCl(PPh3)3). Soon
thereafter cationic Rh and Ir were found catalyze the hydrogenation of alkenes
and carbonyls.[35] In the 1970s, asymmetric hydrogenation was demonstrated in
the synthesis of L-DOPA, and the 1990s saw the invention of Noyori asymmetric
hydrogenation.[36] The development of homogeneous hydrogenation was influenced
by work started in the 1930s and 1940s on the oxo process and Ziegler–Natta
polymerization.

For most practical purposes, hydrogenation requires a metal catalyst.
Hydrogenation can, however, proceed from some hydrogen donors without
catalysts, illustrative hydrogen donors being diimide and aluminium
isopropoxide, the latter illustrated by the Meerwein–Ponndorf–Verley
reduction. Some metal-free catalytic systems have been investigated in
academic research. One such system for reduction of ketones consists of _tert_
-butanol and potassium tert-butoxide and very high temperatures.[37] The
reaction depicted below describes the hydrogenation of benzophenone:

A chemical kinetics study[38] found this reaction is first-order in all three
reactants suggesting a cyclic 6-membered transition state.

Another system for metal-free hydrogenation is based on the phosphine-borane,
compound **1** , which has been called a _frustrated Lewis pair_. It
reversibly accepts dihydrogen at relatively low temperatures to form the
phosphonium borate **2** which can reduce simple hindered imines.[39]

The reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline has been reported to be catalysed by
fullerene, its mono-anion, atmospheric hydrogen and UV light.[40]

Today's bench chemist has three main choices of hydrogenation equipment:

The original and still a commonly practised form of hydrogenation in teaching
laboratories, this process is usually effected by adding solid catalyst to a
round bottom flask of dissolved reactant which has been evacuated using
nitrogen or argon gas and sealing the mixture with a penetrable rubber seal.
Hydrogen gas is then supplied from a H2-filled balloon. The resulting three
phase mixture is agitated to promote mixing. Hydrogen uptake can be monitored,
which can be useful for monitoring progress of a hydrogenation. This is
achieved by either using a graduated tube containing a coloured liquid,
usually aqueous copper sulfate or with gauges for each reaction vessel.

Since many hydrogenation reactions such as hydrogenolysis of protecting groups
and the reduction of aromatic systems proceed extremely sluggishly at
atmospheric temperature and pressure, pressurised systems are popular. In
these cases, catalyst is added to a solution of reactant under an inert
atmosphere in a pressure vessel. Hydrogen is added directly from a cylinder or
built in laboratory hydrogen source, and the pressurized slurry is
mechanically rocked to provide agitation, or a spinning basket is used.[41]
Heat may also be used, as the pressure compensates for the associated
reduction in gas solubility.

Flow hydrogenation has become a popular technique at the bench and
increasingly the process scale. This technique involves continuously flowing a
dilute stream of dissolved reactant over a fixed bed catalyst in the presence
of hydrogen. Using established HPLC technology, this technique allows the
application of pressures from atmospheric to 1,450 psi (100 bar). Elevated
temperatures may also be used. At the bench scale, systems use a range of pre-
packed catalysts which eliminates the need for weighing and filtering
pyrophoric catalysts.

Catalytic hydrogenation is done in a tubular plug-flow reactor (PFR) packed
with a supported catalyst. The pressures and temperatures are typically high,
although this depends on the catalyst. Catalyst loading is typically much
lower than in laboratory batch hydrogenation, and various promoters are added
to the metal, or mixed metals are used, to improve activity, selectivity and
catalyst stability. The use of nickel is common despite its low activity, due
to its low cost compared to precious metals.

Gas Liquid Induction Reactors (Hydrogenator) are also used for carrying out
catalytic hydrogenation.[42]

