The **Kansas City Plant** is a National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA)
facility managed and operated by Honeywell Federal Manufacturing &
Technologies (formerly Bendix Aviation Corporation and Bendix Kansas City
Division of Allied-Signal) that produces 85 percent of the nonnuclear material
used in the United States nuclear weapon arsenal. It was renamed the Kansas
City National Security Campus in 2015.

The plant produces non-nuclear mechanical, electronic, and engineered material
components for U.S. national defense systems such as high-energy laser
ignition systems, microwave hybrid microcircuit production, and miniature
electromechanical devices. The plant also provides technical services such as
metallurgical/mechanical analysis, analytical chemistry, environmental
testing, nondestructive testing, computer-based training, simulations and
analysis, and technical certification.

In 2014, the Kansas City Plant moved to the renamed Kansas City National
Security Campus, a state-of-art facility including manufacturing, laboratory,
office, and warehouse space. The move saves the government about $100 million
annually in operating costs and cut energy consumption by more than 50
percent.[1]

The smaller, more efficient facility maintains the capability to assure the
reliability, safety, and security of the nation’s nuclear deterrent while
enabling NNSA to recruit and retain the next generation of scientists and
engineers.

Initially announced in 2009, the General Services Administration announced
that Zimmer Real Estate Services and CenterPoint Properties had won a bid to
build the replacement plant. The site, adjacent to the former Richards-Gebaur
Air Force Base in south Kansas City near Grandview, Missouri. Zimmer and
CenterPoint already owned the CenterPoint Intermodal Center across the street.
The creative ownership method works this way: a government authority (the
Kansas City Planned Industrial Expansion Authority) owns the land and
improvements and leases the project to CPZ Holding LLC. CPZ Holding subleases
it to CenterPoint Zimmer LLC, which sub-subleases it to the government. Upon
expiration of the government authority's lease, CPZ Holding will own the
project. [2] Financing for the $750 million+ project cost was structured and
provided by CGA Capital. [3] In March 2017 affiliates of CGA Capital acquired
all of the interests of and in CPZ Holding from CenterPoint Properties and its
partners, and will own the project upon expiration of the government
authority's lease.

HNTB Architecture designed the campus, Gibbens Drake Scott Inc. designed the
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing features, which consist of 1.5 million
rentable square feet on the northwest corner of Missouri Highway 150 and Botts
Road on the north edge of Richards-Gebaur.[4]

The developers pay more than $5 million a year in payments in lieu of property
taxes. Half is used to retire the debt service on $40 million worth of public
infrastructure improvements and half funds local tax agencies.[5]

The plant traces its history to the Pratt & Whitney plant dedicated by then
Senator Harry S. Truman in 1942, which manufactured Double Wasp engines during
World War II. In 1949 the Atomic Energy Commission commissioned the Bendix
Corporation to build the non-nuclear components of nuclear warheads there.[6]
Bendix became AlliedSignal in 1983 and eventually Honeywell in 1999.[7]

Coordinates: 38°51′43″N 94°33′10″W﻿ / ﻿38.861973°N 94.552716°W﻿ / 38.861973;
-94.552716

