**Louisville in the American Civil War** was a major stronghold of Union
forces, which kept Kentucky firmly in the Union. It was the center of
planning, supplies, recruiting and transportation for numerous campaigns,
especially in the Western Theater. By the end of the war, Louisville had not
been attacked once, although skirmishes and battles, including the battles of
Perryville and Corydon, took place nearby.

During the 1850s, Louisville became a vibrant and wealthy city, but together
with the success, the city also harbored racial and ethnic tensions. It
attracted numerous immigrants, had a large slave market from which enslaved
African Americans were sold to the Deep South, and had both slaveholders and
abolitionists as residents. In 1850 Louisville became the tenth largest city
in the United States. Louisville's population rose from 10,000 in 1830 to
43,000 in 1850. It became an important tobacco market and pork packing center.
By 1850, Louisville's wholesale trade totaled $20 million (USD) in sales. The
Louisville–New Orleans river route held top rank in freight and passenger
traffic on the entire Western river system.[1]

Not only did Louisville profit from the river, but in August 1855, its
citizens greeted the arrival of the locomotive "Hart County" at Ninth and
Broadway and connection to the nation via railroad. The first passengers
arrived by train on the Louisville and Frankfort Railroad. James Guthrie,
president of the Louisville & Frankfort, pushed the railroad along the
Shelbyville turnpike (Frankfort Avenue) through Gilman's Point (St. Matthews)
and on to Frankfort. The track entered Louisville on Jefferson Street and
ended at Brook Street. The state paid tribute to James Guthrie by naming the
small railroad community of Guthrie, Kentucky in Todd County after him.

Leven Shreve, a Louisville civic leader, became the first president of the
Louisville and Nashville Railroad (L&N), which was to prove more important for
trade. It led to the developing western states and linked with Mississippi
River traffic. With the railroads, Louisville could manufacture furniture and
other goods, and export products to Southern cities. Louisville was on her way
to becoming an industrial city. The Louisville Rolling Mill built girders and
rails, and other factories made cotton machinery, which was sold to Southern
customers. Louisville built steamboats. Louisville emerged with an iron-
working industry; the plant at Tenth and Main was called Ainslie, Cochran, and
Company.

Louisville also became a meat packing city, becoming the second largest city
in the nation to pack pork, butchering an average of 300,000 hogs a year.
Louisville led the nation in hemp manufacturing and cotton bagging. Farmington
Plantation, owned by John Speed, was one of the larger hemp plantations in
Louisville. Hemp was Kentucky's leading agricultural product from 1840 to
1860, and the leading commodity crop of the fertile Bluegrass Region.
Jefferson County led all other markets in gardening and orchards. The sales of
livestock, quality horses and cattle, was also important.

Attracted by jobs and pushed by political unrest and famine, European
immigrants flowed into the city from Germany and Ireland; most of them were
Catholic, unlike the Protestants who lived in the city. By 1850, 359,980
immigrants arrived in the United States, and by 1854, 427,833 immigrants
arrived to seek out a new living. With the increase in new immigrants in the
city, native Louisville residents felt threatened by change, and began to
express anti-foreign, anti-Catholic sentiments. In 1841, the growth in
population prompted the Catholic archdiocese to move the bishop's seat from
Bardstown to Louisville. The archdiocese began construction on a new Catholic
cathedral, which was completed in 1852. This asserted Catholic presence in the
city.

In 1843, a new political party arose, called the American Republican Party. On
July 5, 1845, the American Republican party changed their name to the Native
American Party and held their first national convention in Philadelphia. The
party opposed liberal immigration policies. On June 17, 1854, the Order of the
Star Spangled Banner held its second national convention in New York City. The
members were "native Americans" and anti-Catholic. When the members answered
questions about the group, they responded with "I know nothing about it,"
giving rise to the nickname Know-Nothing for the Native American Party. The
new political party gained national support. The Know-Nothing party encouraged
and tapped into the nation's prejudice and fears that Catholic immigrants
would take control of the United States. Hostility to Catholics had a long
history based on national rivalries in Europe. By 1854, the Know-Nothings
gained control of Jefferson County's government.

Ethnic tension came to a boil in 1855, during the mayor's office election. On
August 6, 1855, "Bloody Monday" erupted, in which Protestant mobs bullied
immigrants away from the polls and began rioting in Irish and German
neighborhoods. Protestant mobs attacked and killed at least twenty-two people.
The rioting began at Shelby and Green Street (Liberty) and progressed through
the city's East End. After burning houses on Shelby Street, the mob headed for
William Ambruster's brewery in the triangle between Baxter Avenue and Liberty
Street. They set the place ablaze and ten Germans died in the fire. When the
mob burned Quinn's Irish Row on the North side of Main between Eleventh and
Twelfth Streets, some tenants died in the fire; the mob shot and killed
others. The Know-Nothing party won the election in Louisville and many other
Kentucky counties.

As in other cities, slavery was a consuming topic; some of Louisville's
economy was built on its thriving slave market. Slave traders' revenues, and
those from feeding, clothing and transporting the slaves to the Deep South,
all contributed to the city's economy. The direct use of slaves as labor in
the central Kentucky economy had lessened by 1850. But throughout the 1850s,
the state slaveholders sold 2500-4000 slaves annually downriver to the Deep
South. Slave pens were located on Second between Market and Main Streets.

The Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854 added to the controversy, as it threatened
potentially lucrative expansion of slavery to western states. Louisville also
had a free black population, among whom some managed to acquire property.
Washington Spradling, freed from slavery in 1814, became a barber. By the
1850s, he owned real estate valued at $30,000. With its agriculture, shipping
trade and industry, and slave markets, Louisville was a city that shared in
cultures of both the agricultural South and the industrial North.

In the November 1860 Presidential election, Kentucky voters gave native
Kentuckian Abraham Lincoln less than one percent of the vote. Kentuckians did
not like Lincoln, because he stood for the eradication of slavery and his
Republican Party aligned itself with the North. But, neither did they vote for
native son John C. Breckinridge and his Southern Democratic Party, generally
regarded as secessionists. In 1860, people in the state held 225,000 slaves,
with Louisville's slaves comprising 7.5 percent of the population. The voters
wanted both to keep slavery and stay in the Union.

Most Kentuckians, including residents of Louisville, voted for John Bell of
Tennessee, of the Constitutional Union Party. It stood for preserving the
Union and keeping the _status quo_ on slavery. Others voted for Stephen
Douglas of Illinois, who ran for the Democratic Party ticket. Louisville cast
3,823 votes for John Bell. Douglas received 2,633 votes.

On December 20, 1860, South Carolina seceded from the Union, and ten other
Southern states followed. Kentucky, however, remained in the Union.

On April 12, 1861, Confederate Brigadier General Pierre G. T. Beauregard
ordered the firing on Fort Sumter, located in the Charleston, South Carolina
harbor, thus starting the Civil War. At the time of the Battle of Fort Sumter,
the fort's commander was Union Major Robert Anderson of Louisville.

After the attack on Fort Sumter, President of the United States Abraham
Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers. Kentucky Governor Beriah Magoffin
refused to send any men to act against the Southern states, and both Unionists
and secessionists supported his position. On April 17, 1861, Louisville hoped
to remain neutral and spent $50,000 for the defense of the city, naming Lovell
Rousseau as brigadier general. Rousseau formed the Home Guard. When Unionists
asked Lincoln for help, he secretly sent arms to the Home Guard. The U. S.
government sent a shipment of weapons to Louisville and kept the rifles hidden
in the basement of the Jefferson County Courthouse.

Louisville residents were divided as to which side they should support.
Economic interests and previous relationships often determined alliances.
Prominent Louisville attorney James Speed, brother of Lincoln's close friend
Joshua Fry Speed, strongly advocated keeping the state in the Union.
Louisville Main Street wholesale merchants, who had extensive trade with the
South, often supported the Confederacy. Blue-collar workers, small retailers,
and professional men, such as lawyers, supported the Union. On April 20, two
companies of Confederate volunteers left by steamboat for New Orleans, and
five days later, three more companies departed for Nashville on the L & N
Railroad. Union recruiters raised troops at Eighth and Main, and the Union
recruits left for Indiana to join other Union regiments.

On May 20, 1861, Kentucky declared its neutrality. An important state
geographically, Kentucky had the Ohio River as a natural barrier. Kentucky's
natural resources, manpower, and the L&N Railroad made both the North and
South respect Kentucky's neutrality. President Lincoln and Confederate
President Jefferson Davis both maintained hands-off policies when dealing with
Kentucky, hoping not to push the state into one camp or the other. From the
L&N depot on Ninth and Broadway in Louisville and the steamboats at Louisville
wharfs, supporters of the Confederacy sent uniforms, lead, bacon, coffee and
war material south. Although Lincoln did not want to upset Kentucky's
neutrality, on July 10, 1861, a federal judge in Louisville ruled that the
United States government had the right to stop shipments of goods from going
south over the L&N railroad.

On July 15, 1861, the War Department authorized United States Navy Lieutenant
William "Bull" Nelson to establish a training camp and organize a brigade of
infantry. Nelson commissioned William J. Landram, a colonel of cavalry; and
Theophilus T. Garrard, Thomas E. Bramlette, and Speed S. Fry colonels of
infantry. Landram turned his commission over to Lieutenant Colonel Frank
Wolford. When Garrard, Bramlette, and Fry established their camps at Camp Dick
Robinson in Garrard County, and Wolford erected his camp near Harrodsburg,
Kentucky's neutrality effectively ended.[2] Brigadier General Rousseau
established a Union training camp opposite Louisville in Jeffersonville,
Indiana, naming the camp after Joseph Holt. Governor Magoffin protested to
Lincoln about the Union camps, but he ignored Magoffin, stating that the will
of the people wanted the camps to remain in Kentucky.[3]

In August 1861, Kentucky held elections for the State General Assembly, and
Unionists won majorities in both houses. Residents of Louisville continued to
be divided on the issue of which side to join. The _Louisville Courier_ was
very much pro-Confederate, while the _Louisville Journal_ was pro-Union.

On September 4, 1861, Confederate General Leonidas Polk, outraged by Union
intrusions in the state, invaded Columbus, Kentucky. As a result of the
Confederate invasion, Union General Ulysses S. Grant entered Paducah,
Kentucky. Jefferson Davis allowed Confederate troops to stay in Kentucky.
General Albert Sidney Johnston, commander of all Confederate forces in the
West, sent General Simon Bolivar Buckner of Kentucky to invade Bowling Green,
Kentucky. Union forces in Kentucky saw Buckner's move toward Bowling Green as
the beginning of a massive attack on Louisville. With twenty thousand troops,
Johnston established a defensive line stretching from Columbus in western
Kentucky to the Cumberland Gap, controlled by Confederate General Felix
Zollicoffer.

On September 7, the Kentucky State legislature, angered by the Confederate
invasion, ordered the Union flag to be raised over the state capitol in
Frankfort and declared its allegiance with the Union. The legislature also
passed the "Non-Partisan Act", which stated that "any person or any person's
family that joins or aids the so-called Confederate Army was no longer a
citizen of the Commonwealth."[4] The legislature denied any member of the
Confederacy the right to land, titles or money held in Kentucky or the right
to legal redress for action taken against them.

With Confederate troops in Bowling Green, Union General Robert Anderson moved
his headquarters to Louisville. Union General George McClellan appointed
Anderson as military commander for the District of Kentucky on June 4, 1861.
On September 9, the Kentucky legislature asked Anderson to be made commander
of the Federal military force in Kentucky. The Union army accepted the
Louisville Legion at Camp Joe Holt in Indiana into the regular army.
Louisville mayor John M. Delph sent two thousand men to build defenses around
the city.

On October 8, Anderson stepped down as commander of the Department of the
Cumberland and Union General William Tecumseh Sherman took charge of the Home
Guard. Lovell Rousseau sent the Louisville Legion along with another two
thousand men across the river to protect the city. Sherman wrote to his
superiors that he needed 200,000 men to take care of Johnston's Confederates.
The Louisville Legion and the Home Guard marched out to meet Buckner's forces,
but Buckner did not approach Louisville. Buckner's men destroyed the bridge
over the Rolling Fork River in Lebanon Junction and with the mission
completed, Buckner's men returned to Bowling Green.

Louisville became a staging ground for Union troops heading south. Union
troops flowed into Louisville from Ohio, Indiana, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.
White tents and training grounds sprang up at the Oakland track, Old
Louisville and Portland. Camps were also established at Eighteenth and
Broadway, and along the Frankfort and Bardstown turnpikes.

By early 1862, Louisville had 80,000 Union troops throughout the city. With so
many troops, entrepreneurs set up gambling establishments along the north side
of Jefferson from 4th to 5th Street, extending around the corner from 5th to
Market, then continuing on the south side of Market back to 4th Street.
Photography studios and military goods shops, such as Fletcher & Bennett on
Main Street, catered to the Union officers and soldiers. Also capitalizing on
the troops, brothels were quickly opened around the city.

In January 1862, Union General George Thomas defeated Confederate General
Felix Zollicoffer at the Battle of Mill Springs, Kentucky. In February 1862,
Union General Ulysses Grant and Admiral Andrew Foote's gunboats captured Fort
Henry and Fort Donelson on the Kentucky and Tennessee border. Confederate
General Albert Sidney Johnston's defensive line in Kentucky crumbled rapidly.
Johnston had no choice but to fall back to Nashville, Tennessee. No defensive
preparations had been made at Nashville, so Johnson continued to fall back to
Corinth, Mississippi.

Although the threat of invasion by Confederates subsided, Louisville remained
a staging area for Union supplies and troops heading south. By May 1862, the
steamboats arrived and departed at the wharf in Louisville with their cargoes.
Military contractors in Louisville provided the Union army with two hundred
head of cattle each day, and the pork packers provided thousands of hogs
daily. Trains departed for the south along the L&N railroad.

In July 1862, Confederate generals Braxton Bragg, commander of the Army of
Mississippi, and Edmund Kirby Smith, commander of the Army of East Tennessee,
planned an invasion of Kentucky. On August 13, Smith marched with 9,000 men
out of Knoxville toward western Kentucky and arrived in Barbourville. On
August 20, Smith announced that he would take Lexington. On August 28, Bragg's
army moved west. At the Battle of Richmond, Kentucky, on August 30, Smith's
Confederate forces defeated Union General William "Bull" Nelson's troops,
capturing the entire force. This left Kentucky with no Union support. Nelson
managed to escape back to Louisville. Smith marched into Lexington and sent a
Confederate cavalry force to take Frankfort: Kentucky's capitol.

Union General Don Carlos Buell's army withdrew from Alabama and headed back to
Kentucky. Union General Henry Halleck, commander of all Union forces in the
West, sent two divisions from General Ulysses Grant's army, stationed in
Mississippi, to Buell. Confederate General John Hunt Morgan, of Lexington,
Kentucky, managed to destroy the L&N railroad tunnel at Gallatin, Tennessee,
cutting off all supplies to Buell's Union army. On September 5, Buell reached
Murfreesboro, Tennessee and headed for Nashville. On September 14, Bragg
reached Glasgow, Kentucky. On that same day, Buell reached Bowling Green,
Kentucky.

Bragg decided to take Louisville. One of the major objectives of the
Confederate campaign in Kentucky was to seize the Louisville and Portland
Canal and sever Union supply routes on the Ohio River. One Confederate officer
suggested destroying the Louisville canal so completely that "future travelers
would hardly know where it was." On September 16, Bragg's army reached
Munfordville, Kentucky. Col. James Chalmers attacked the Federal garrison at
Munfordville, but Bragg had to bail him out. Bragg arrived at Munfordville
with his entire force, and the Union force soon surrendered.

Buell left Bowling Green and headed for Louisville. Fearing that Buell would
not arrive in Louisville to prevent Bragg's army from capturing the city,
Union General William "Bull" Nelson ordered the construction of a hasty
defensive line around the city. He also ordered the placement of pontoon
bridges across the Ohio to facilitate the evacuation of the city or to receive
reinforcements from Indiana. Two pontoon bridges built of coal barges were
erected, one at the location of the Big Four Bridge, and the other from
Portland to New Albany. The Union Army arrived in time to prevent the
Confederate seizure of the city. On September 25, Buell's tired and hungry men
arrived in the city.

Bragg moved his army to Bardstown but did not take Louisville. Bragg urged
General Smith to join his forces to take Louisville, but Smith told him to
take Louisville on his own.

With the Confederate army under Bragg preparing to attack Louisville, the
citizens of Louisville panicked. On September 22, 1862, General Nelson issued
an evacuation order: "The women and children of this city will prepare to
leave the city without delay." He ordered the Jeffersonville ferry to be used
for military purposes only. Private vehicles were not allowed to go aboard the
ferry boats without a special permit. Hundreds of Louisville residents
gathered at the wharf for boats to New Albany or Jeffersonville. With
Frankfort in Confederate hands for about a month, Governor Magoffin maintained
his office in Louisville and the state legislature held their sessions in the
Jefferson County Courthouse. Troops, volunteers and impressed labor worked
around the clock to build a ring of breastworks and entrenchments around the
city. New Union regiments flowed into the city. General William "Bull" Nelson
took charge of the defense of Louisville. He sent Union troops to build
pontoon bridges at Jeffersonville and New Albany to speed up the arrival of
reinforcements, supplies and, if needed, the emergency evacuation of the city.

Instead of taking Louisville, Bragg left Bardstown to install Confederate
Governor Richard Hawes at Frankfort. On September 26, five hundred Confederate
cavalrymen rode into the area of Eighteenth and Oak, capturing fifty Union
soldiers. Confederates placed pickets around Middletown on the 26th, and on
the 27th their soldiers repelled Union forces from Middletown near Shelbyville
Pike.[5] Southern forces reached two miles from the city, but were not
numerous enough to invade it. On September 30, Confederate and Union pickets
fought at Gilman's Point in St. Matthews and pushed the Confederates back
through Middletown to Floyd's Fork.[6]

The War Department ordered "Bull" Nelson to command the newly formed Army of
the Ohio. When Louisville prepared for the Confederate army under Bragg,
General Jefferson C. Davis (not to be confused with Confederate President
Jefferson Davis), who could not reach his command under General Don Carlos
Buell, met with General Nelson to offer his services. General Nelson gave him
the command of the city militia. General Davis opened an office and assisted
organizing the city militia. On Wednesday, General Davis visited General
Nelson in his room at the Galt House. General Davis told General Nelson that
his brigade he assigned Davis was ready for service and asked if he could
obtain arms for them. This led to an argument in which Nelson threatened Davis
with arrest. General Davis left the room, and, in order to avoid arrest,
crossed over the river to Jeffersonville, where he remained until the next
day, when General Stephen G. Burbridge joined him. General Burbridge had also
been relieved of command by General Nelson for a trivial cause. General Davis
went to Cincinnati with General Burbridge and reported to General Wright, who
ordered General Davis to return to Louisville and report to General Buell, and
General Burbridge to remain in Cincinnati.

General Davis returned to Louisville and reported to Buell. When General Davis
saw General Nelson in the main hall of the Galt House, fronting the office, he
asked the Governor of Indiana, Oliver Morton to witness the conversation
between him and General Nelson. The Governor agreed and the two walked up to
General Nelson. General Davis confronted General Nelson and told him that he
took advantage of his authority. Their argument escalated and Nelson slapped
Davis in the face, challenging him to a duel. In three minutes, Davis
returned, with a pistol he had borrowed, and shot and killed Nelson. The
General whispered: "It's all over," and died fifteen minutes later.[7]

With General Nelson dead, the command switched over to General Don Carlos
Buell. On October 1, the Union army marched out of Louisville with sixty
thousand men. Buell sent a small Federal force to Frankfort to deceive Bragg
as to the exact direction and location of the Federal army. The ruse worked.
On October 4, the small Federal force attacked Frankfort and Bragg left the
city and headed back for Bardstown, thinking the entire Federal force was
headed for Frankfort. Bragg decided that all Confederate forces should
concentrate at Harrodsburg, Kentucky, ten miles (16 km) northwest of Danville.
On October 8, 1862, Buell and Bragg fought at Perryville, Kentucky. Bragg's
16,000 men attacked Buell's 60,000 men. Federal forces suffered 845 dead,
2,851 wounded and 515 missing, while the Confederate toll was 3,396. Although
Bragg won the Battle of Perryville tactically, he wisely decided to pull out
of Perryville and link up with Smith. Once Smith and Bragg joined forces,
Bragg decided to leave Kentucky and head for Tennessee.

After the battle, thousands of wounded men flooded into Louisville. Hospitals
were set up in public schools, homes, factories and churches. The Fifth Ward
School, built at 5th and York Streets in 1855, became Military Hospital Number
Eight. The United States Marine Hospital also became a hospital for the
wounded Union soldiers from the battle of Perryville. Constructed between 1845
and 1852, the three-story Greek revival style Louisville Marine Hospital
contained one hundred beds. It became the prototype for seven U.S. Marine
Hospital Service buildings, including Paducah, Kentucky, which later became
Fort Anderson. Union surgeons erected the Brown General Hospital, located near
the Belknap campus of the University of Louisville, and other hospitals were
erected at Jeffersonville and New Albany, Indiana. By early 1863, the War
Department and the U.S. Sanitary Commission erected nineteen hospitals. By
early June 1863, 930 deaths had been recorded in the Louisville hospitals.
Cave Hill Cemetery set aside plots for the Union dead.

Louisville also had to contend with Confederate prisoners. Located at the
corner of Green Street and 5th Street, the Union Army Prison, also called the
"Louisville Military Prison", took over the old "Medical College building."
Union authorities moved the prison near the corner of 10th and Broadway
Streets. By August 27, 1862, Confederate prisoners of war were taken to the
new military prison. The old facility continued to house new companies of
Provost Guards. From October 1, 1862 to December 14, 1862, the new Louisville
Military Prison housed 3,504 prisoners. In December 1863, the prison held over
2,000 men, including political prisoners, Union deserters, and Confederate
prisoners of war.

Made of wood, the prison covered an entire city block, stretching from east to
west between 10th and 11th Streets and north to south between Magazine and
Broadway Streets. Its main entrance was located on Broadway near 10th Street.
A high fence surrounded the prison with at least two prison barracks. The
prison hospital was attached to the prison and consisted of two barracks on
the south and west sides of the square with forty beds in each building. The
Union commander at the Louisville Military Prison was Colonel Dent. In April
1863, Captain Stephen E. Jones succeeded him. In October 1863, military
authorities replaced Captain Jones with C. B. Pratt.[8]

A block away, Union authorities took over a large house on Broadway between
12th and 13th Streets and converted it into a military prison for women.

On September 22, 1862, President Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation,
which declared that as of January 1, 1863, all slaves in the rebellion states
would be free. Although this did not affect slaveholding in Kentucky at the
time, owners felt threatened. Some Kentucky Union soldiers, including Colonel
Frank Wolford of the 1st Kentucky Cavalry, quit the army in protest of freeing
the slaves. The proclamation presaged an end to slavery.

So many slaves arrived at the Union camp that the Army set up a contraband
camp to accommodate them. The Reverend Thomas James, an African Methodist
Episcopal minister from New York, supervised activities at the camp and set up
a church and school for the refugees. Both adults and children started
learning to read. Under direction by generals Stephen G. Burbridge and John M.
Palmer, James monitored conditions at prisons and could call on US troops to
protect slaves from being held illegally, which he did several times.[9]

The Union's recruitment of slaves into the army (which gained them freedom)
turned some slaveholders in Kentucky against the US government. In later
years, the depredations of guerrilla warfare in the state, together with Union
measures to try to suppress it, and the excesses of General Burbridge as
military governor of Kentucky, were probably more significant in alienating
more citizens. Civic rights were overridden during the crisis. These issues
turned many against the Republican administration.

After the war ended, the Democrats regained power in central and western
Kentucky, which the former slaveholders and their culture dominated. Because
this area was the more populous and the Democrats also passed legislation
essentially disfranchising freedmen, the white Democrats controlled politics
in the state and sent mostly their representatives to Congress for a
century.[10] In the mid-1960s, the federal Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights
Act ended legal segregation of public facilities and protected voting rights
of minorities.

The Taylor Barracks at Third and Oak in Louisville recruited black soldiers
for the United States Colored Troops. Slaves gained freedom in exchange for
service to the Union. Slave women married to USCT men received freedom, as
well. To secure legal freedom for the many slave women arriving alone at the
contraband camp, Burbridge directed James to marry them to available USCT
soldiers, if both parties were willing.[9] Black Union soldiers who died in
service were buried in Louisville's Eastern Cemetery.

In the Summer of 1863, Confederate John Hunt Morgan violated orders and led
his famous raid into Ohio and Indiana to give the northern states a taste of
the war. He traveled with his troops through north-central Kentucky, trekking
from Bardstown to Garnettsville, a now defunct town in Otter Creek Park. They
took the Lebanon garrison, capturing hundreds of Union soldiers and then
releasing them on parole. Before crossing the Ohio River into Indiana, Morgan
and his crew arrived in Brandenburg, where they proceeded to capture two
steamers, the _John B. McCombs_ and the _Alice Dean_ ; the _Alice Dean_ burned
after their crossing.

After the fall of New Orleans and the capture of Vicksburg, Mississippi on
July 4, 1863, the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers were open to Union boats without
harassment. On December 24, 1863, a steamboat from New Orleans reached
Louisville.

In late 1863, General Hugh Ewing, brother-in-law to General Sherman, was
appointed Military Commander of Louisville.

Widespread guerrilla warfare in the state meant a widespread breakdown in the
society, causing residents to suffer. In Kentucky, the Union defined a
guerrilla as any member of the Confederate army who destroyed supplies,
equipment or money. On January 12, 1864, Union General Stephen G. Burbridge,
formerly supervising Louisville, succeeded General Jeremiah Boyle as Military
Commander of Kentucky.

On February 4, 1864 at the Galt House, Union generals Ulysses S. Grant,
William S. Rosecrans, George Stoneman, Thomas L. Crittenden, James S.
Wadsworth, David Hunter, John Schofield, Alexander McCook, Robert Allen,
George Thomas, Stephen Burbridge and Read Admiral David Porter met to discuss
the most important campaign of the war. It would divide the Confederacy into
three parts. In a follow-up meeting on March 19, generals Grant and William
Tecumseh Sherman met at the Galt House to plan the Spring campaign. (As of
2014[update], that these meetings actually occurred has fallen into
dispute.[11]) Grant took on Confederate General Robert E. Lee at Richmond and
Sherman confronted General Joseph E. Johnston, capturing Atlanta, Georgia in
the process.[12]

On February 21, 1864, Jefferson General Hospital, the third-largest hospital
during the Civil War, was established across the Ohio River at Port Fulton,
Indiana to tend to soldiers injured due to the war.

On July 5, 1864, President Abraham Lincoln temporarily suspended the writ of
_habeas corpus_ , which meant a person could be imprisoned without trial, his
house searched without warrant, and the individual arrested without charge.
Lincoln also declared martial law in Kentucky, which meant that military
authorities had the ultimate rule. Civilians accused of crimes would be tried
not in a civilian court, but instead a military court, in which the citizen's
rights were not held as under the Constitution. On the same day, General
Burbridge was appointed military governor of Kentucky with absolute
authority.[13]

On July 16, 1864, Burbridge issued Order No. 59: "Whenever an unarmed Union
citizen is murdered, four guerrillas will be selected from the prison and
publicly shot to death at the most convenient place near the scene of the
outrages."[14] On August 7, Burbridge issued Order No. 240 in which Kentucky
became a military district under his direct command. Burbridge could seize
property without trial from persons he deemed disloyal. He could also execute
suspects without trial or question.

During the months of July and August, Burbridge initiated building more
fortifications in Kentucky, although Sherman's march through Georgia
effectively reduced the Confederate threat to Kentucky. Burbridge received
permission from Union General John Schofield to build fortifications in Mount
Sterling, Lexington, Frankfort and Louisville. Each location was to have a
small enclosed field work of about two hundred yards along the interior crest,
except for Louisville, which would be five hundred yards. Other earthworks
were planned to follow in Louisville. All the works were to be built by
soldiers, except at Frankfort, where the state would assign workers, and at
Louisville, where the city would manage it. Lt. Colonel. J. H, Simpson, of the
Federal Engineers, furnished the plans and engineering force.

Eleven forts protected the city in a ring about ten miles (16 km) long from
Beargrass Creek to Paddy's Run. The first work built was Fort McPherson, which
commanded the approaches to the city via the Shepherdsville Pike, Third Street
Road, and the Louisville & Nashville Railroad. The fort was to serve as a
citadel if an attack came before the other forts were completed. The fort
could house one thousand men. General Hugh Ewing, Union commander in
Louisville, directing that municipal authorities furnish laborers for
fortifications, ordered the arrest of all "loafers found about gambling and
other disreputable establishments" in the city for construction work, and
assigned military convicts as laborers. It was typical of military commanders
to press citizens into service.

Each fort was a basic earth-and-timber structure surrounded by a ditch with a
movable drawbridge at the entrance to the fort. Each was furnished with an
underground magazine to house two hundred rounds of artillery shells. The
eleven forts occupied the most commanding positions to provide interlocking
cross fire between them. A supply of entrenching tools was collected and
stored for emergency construction of additional batteries and infantry
entrenchments between the fortifications. As it happened, the guns in the
Louisville forts were never fired except for salutes.

With orders No. 59 and No. 240, Burbridge began a campaign to suppress
guerrilla activity in Kentucky and Louisville. On August 11, Burbridge
commanded Captain Hackett of the 26th Kentucky to select four men to be taken
from prison in Louisville to Eminence, Henry County, Kentucky, to be shot for
unidentified outrages. On August 20, suspected Confederate guerrillas J. H.
Cave and W. B. McClasshan were taken from Louisville to Franklin, Simpson
County, to be shot for an unidentified reason. The commanding officer General
Ewing declared that Cave was innocent and sought a pardon from Burbridge, but
he refused. Both men were shot.[15]

On October 25, Burbridge ordered four men, Wilson Lilly, Sherwood Hartley,
Captain Lindsey Dale Buckner and M. Bincoe, to be shot by Captain Rowland
Hackett of Company B, 26th Kentucky for the alleged killing of a postal
carrier near Brunerstown (present day Jeffersontown). This was in retaliation
for the killing by guerrillas allegedly led by Captain Marcellus Jerome
Clarke, sometimes called "Sue Mundy". On November 6, two men named Cheney and
Morris were taken from the prison in Louisville and transported to
Munfordville and shot in retaliation for the killing of Madison Morris, of
Company A, 13th Kentucky Infantry. James Hopkins, John Simple and Samuel
Stingle were taken from Louisville to Bloomfield, Nelson County, and shot in
retaliation for the alleged guerrilla shooting of two black men. On November
15, two Confederate soldiers were taken from prison in Louisville to Lexington
and hung at the Fair Grounds in retaliation. On November 19, eight men were
taken from Louisville to Munfordville to be shot for retaliation for the
killing of two Union men.[16]

By the end of 1864, Burbridge ordered the arrest of twenty-one prominent
Louisville citizens, plus the chief justice of the State Court of Appeals, on
treason charges. He had captured guerrillas brought to Louisville and hanged
on Broadway at 15th or 18th Streets. General Ewing was effectively out of the
loop and often bedridden from attacks of rheumatism. As he was ordered to
rejoin his brother-in-law General Sherman, Ewing has escaped the condemnation
of Burbridge's actions in Louisville.

By the November elections of 1864, Burbridge tried to interfere with the
election for President. Despite military interference, Kentucky citizens voted
overwhelmingly for Union General George B. McClellan over Lincoln. Twelve
counties were not allowed to post their returns.[17] In December 1864,
President Lincoln appointed James Speed as the U.S. Attorney General.[18]

Although the Confederacy began to fall apart in January 1865, Burbridge
continued executing guerrillas. On January 20, 1865, Nathaniel Marks, formerly
of Company A, 4th Kentucky, C.S. was condemned as a guerrilla. He claimed his
innocence, but was shot by a firing squad in Louisville. On February 10,
Burbridge's term as military governor came to an end. Secretary of War Edwin
Stanton replaced Burbridge with Major General John Palmer.

On March 12, Union forces captured 20-year-old Captain M. Jerome Clarke, the
alleged "Sue Mundy", along with Henry Medkiff and Henry C. Magruder, ten miles
(16 km) south of Brandenburg near Breckinridge County. The Union Army hanged
Clarke three days later just west of the corner of 18th and Broadway in
Louisville, after a military trial in which he was charged as a guerrilla.
During the secret three-hour trial, Clarke was not allowed counsel or
witnesses for his defense, although he asked to be treated as a prisoner of
war. Magruder was allowed to recover from war injuries before being executed
by hanging on October 29.[19]

On April 9, Confederate General Robert E. Lee surrendered to Union General
Ulysses Grant, and on April 14, Confederate General Joseph Johnston
surrendered to Union General William T. Sherman, ending the Civil War.

On May 15, Louisville became a mustering-out center for troops from midwestern
and western states. On June 4, 1865, military authorities established the
headquarters of the Union Armies of the West in Louisville. During June 1865,
96,796 troops and 8,896 animals left Washington, D.C. for the Ohio Valley.
There 70,000 men took steamboats to Louisville and the remainder embarked for
St. Louis and Cincinnati. The troops boarded ninety-two steamboats at
Parkersburg and descended the river in convoys of eight boats, to the sounds
of cheering crowds and booming cannon salutes at every port city. For several
weeks, Union soldiers crowded Louisville. On July 4, 1865, Union General
William T. Sherman visited Louisville to conduct a final inspection of the
Armies of the West. By mid-July the Armies of the West disbanded and the
soldiers headed home.

It is important to take note that due to the Emancipation Proclamation, the
severity of Martial Law under Burbridge and the enlistment of Kentucky slaves
into Union regiments (Kentucky had the 2nd largest African American Union
enlistment only behind Louisiana) Union support among native Kentuckians
greatly diminished by war’s end. This is documented in Louisville by a
prominent Washington DC journalist, Whitelaw Reid who accompanied Chief
Justice Salmon P. Chase for a tour of the south from May 1, 1865 to May 1,
1866 . Reid observed in 1865 “At Louisville a pleasant dinner party enabled us
to meet the last collection of men from the midst of a Rebel community. At
that time there was more loyalty in Nashville than in Louisville, and about as
much in Charleston as in either. For the first and only time on the trip, save
while we were under the Spanish flag, slaves waited on us at dinner. They were
the last any of us were ever to see on American soil.” This sentiment is also
evident in the daily violence between Louisville citizens and the Union
soldiers mustering out of the city to their home states during this period.
[20]

On December 18, the Kentucky legislature repealed the Expatriation Act of
1861, allowing all who served in the Confederacy to have their full Kentucky
citizenship restored without fear of retribution. The legislature also
repealed the law that defined any person who was a member of the Confederacy
as guilty of treason. The Kentucky legislature allowed former Confederates to
run for office. On February 28, 1866, Kentucky officially declared the war
over.[21]

After the war, Louisville returned to growth, with an increase in
manufacturing, establishment of new factories, and transporting goods by
train. The new industrial jobs attracted both black rural workers, including
freedmen from the South, and foreign immigrants. It was a city of opportunity
for them. Ex-Confederate officers entered law, insurance, real estate and
political offices, largely taking control of the city. This led to the jibe
that Louisville joined the Confederacy after the war was over.

Women sympathizing with the Confederacy organized many groups, including in
Kentucky. During the postwar years, Confederate women ensured the burial of
the dead, including sometimes allocating certain cemeteries or sections to
Confederate veterans, and raised money to build memorials to the war and their
losses. By the 1890s, the memorial movement came under the control of the
United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC) and United Confederate Veterans
(UCV), who promoted the "Lost Cause". Making meaning after the war was another
way of writing its history.[22] In 1895, the women's group supported the
erection of a Confederate monument near the University of Louisville campus.

“The Lost Cause” movement in Louisville primarily occurred between 1865 and
1935. This is due to most native Kentuckians coming to regret their decision
to support the Union due to the war’s upending of the antebellum racial and
social hierarchy in Kentucky. One of the most notable personalities of
Louisville during this time was that of Henry Watterson, a Confederate veteran
and editor in chief of the newly formed Courier-Journal (1868). He was a major
proponent of the New South Creed which emphasized a vision of a prosperous and
independent South within an expanding American empire. He is the person who
coined Louisville as being “The Gateway to the South”. Watterson was one of
the most important and widely read newspaper editors in American history. In
the late 19th Century The Courier Journal had the largest circulation of any
paper outside of New York and was the paper of record for Kentucky and that of
the entire south. The Courier Journal had four times the circulation of fellow
New South advocate Henry Grady’s Atlanta Constitution. [23] [24]

Around 1864–65, city defenses, including eleven forts ordered by Union General
Stephen G. Burbridge, formed a ring about ten miles (16 km) long from
Beargrass Creek to Paddy's Run. Nothing remains of these constructions.[25]
They included, from east to west:

Also in the area were Camp Gilbert (1862) and Camp C. F. Smith (1862), both at
undetermined locations.

