**Mary Drake** is a fictional character created by I. Marlene King and
portrayed by Andrea Parker in the American television series _Pretty Little
Liars_. _Pretty Little Liars_ is a television adaptation of the novel series
of the same name written by Sara Shepard, in which the antagonist Alison
DiLaurentis has an identical twin sister, Courtney DiLaurentis. It is believed
that Mary is the on-screen counterpart of Courtney, though her recent
characterization is more in line with Alison. The character makes her first
official introduction during the sixth-season finale "Hush, Hush, Sweet
Liars". The Liars discover that Mary is Jessica DiLaurentis' identical twin
sister, a former patient at Radley Sanitarium who is Charlotte's biological
mother. In "The DArkest Knight", Drake is also revealed to be Spencer
Hastings' biological mother. During "Till Death Do Us Part", the elusive A.D.
is revealed to be Alex Drake, Spencer's younger identical twin sister. Alex
believed the Liars knew who was accountable for Charlotte's murder and was
also set on physically replacing Spencer due to being jealous of the life that
she had.

Andrea Parker had portrayed Jessica DiLaurentis since the second season, thus
placing her as the actor behind Mary Drake, as Mary is Jessica's identical
twin. _TVLine_ confirmed that Parker was added as a series regular for the
seventh season.[1]

Mary's mental health issues allegedly began to show up when she was a
teenager, after an incident took place at her sister's job. Jessica was
babysitting Teddy Carver, when she phoned Mary to replace her so she could go
on a date with Matt Brooks. While babysitting, the baby died under Mary's care
and she was sent to Radley Sanitarium as a consequence. Mary told the baby's
parents she hadn't even touched the boy and that it was her sister's fault,
but no one believed her word due to Jessica manipulating people into thinking
she was volatile. Mary was forced to stay in Radley until she was 18, however
she was readmitted several times over the following decade. Mary met Ted
Wilson when he was a senior student in college and they dated for a while
until she became pregnant. She left without telling Ted she was carrying his
child and eventually gave birth to their son Charles at Radley. The baby was
then adopted by Jessica and Kenneth since they feared for the newborn's
safety.

Several years later Mary walked into a restaurant and ran into Peter Hastings.
She took advantage of the moment to pose as her sister Jessica, whom Peter
previously had an affair with. Drake ended up seducing him and their brief
sexual encounter resulted in another pregnancy. Afterwards, Mary gave birth to
identical twins. The first born Spencer Hastings, was taken from her much like
Charles and later placed in the care of their biological father, along with
his wife, Veronica. The existence of a second twin, Alex Drake, was unknown to
them since Alex was born minutes after Spencer had already been given to Peter
and Veronica. Mary, desperate to escape Radley, arranged for Doctor Cochran
sell Alex to a wealthy couple in England. However, Alex started to develop
mental health problems at an early age, and the family that took her in
refused to tarnish their reputation. Alex was then stripped of her adoptive
name and placed into an orphanage under her birth name. On her tenth birthday,
Alex ran away from the Ambrose Home for wayward children, a year before Mary
discovered she was there.

Drake was permanently released from the psychiatric hospital when she was 28
years old, thanks to the money she had gotten from selling Alex. Not much is
known about her whereabouts after checking out of Radley, only that she'd
travelled a lot, especially around Europe and Latin America.

Mary briefly returned to Rosewood when her daughter Spencer was a senior
student in Rosewood High, wanting to see how she looked. According to Peter,
Drake asked him to help her get revenge on Jessica for lying about Charles
having committed suicide in order to seclude his sex change. When he refused
to assist her vendetta, she poisoned Jessica with Peter's medication and
buried her body at the Hastings' backyard in an attempt to frame him for her
sister's murder. However, we later learn that Peter and Jessica had planned to
use his heart medication pills to kill Mary and prevent her from seeing
Spencer again.[2] Drake came back once more after discovering that her
firstborn had been murdered and began working with Elliott Rollins,
Charlotte's lover, to avenge her homicide.[3][4]

Drake's first known appearance in the series takes place in the episode "Cover
for Me". Mary sneaks into Spencer's bedroom to get a good look at her. After
Veronica calls out her daughter's name, Drake hides in a corner and exits the
room unnoticed.

Drake appears in the episode "Did You Miss Me?". She dressed up as Jessica, in
order to visit her niece Alison DiLaurentis at the hospital. Ali assumes she's
having a dream due to the state of her concussion. Mary proceededs to tell
Alison that she's happy with her niece's marriage to Elliott Rollins and that
he'll be able to protect her in a way that she couldn't.[5][6][7]

Throughout "Hush, Hush, Sweet Liars", Mary and Elliott dress up as Jessica and
detective Darren Wilden in order to drive Alison insane and trick her into
checking herself at the Welby State Psychiatric Hospital. Footage of Drake
nearby the fence Caleb built outside the Lost Woods Resort is later captured.
However, the Liars were unaware of Mary's existence and mistook her for
Jessica instead. As they left the forest, Drake returned to the DiLaurentis'
house where she met Elliott. There, she asks if Alison "signed the papers."
Elliott confirms, stating that 51% of the Carissimi Group shares were diverted
at the time Alison signed her entry to the psychiatric hospital. Mary reveals
that she is planning a revenge against her deceased sister. She then tenderly
glances at a picture of Charlotte in a frame and states that her daughter
would've approved her malicious agenda.[8][9][10]

In "Tick-Tock, Bitches", the Liars, Mona, Toby, Ezra and Caleb witness Mary
walking towards the police station, while they're trying to come up with a
plan regarding Hanna's abduction. After Toby heads there to interrogate her,
he finds out that Mary is Jessica's identical twin sister and was there to
report a break-in at the Lost Woods Resort, her newest acquisition. Deducing
she's A.D., they begin spying on her and investigate the motel, only to find
out Mary had bought everything it's needed to cover up a murder. Later, Mary
visits the Hastings residence and is invited by Spencer inside, for a cup of
tea. As she subtly interrogates Mary, Spencer finds out that Drake knows her
family suspiciously well. Spencer asks why her existence should be considered
a secret, a question by which Mary feels offended. She apologizes immediately
after, telling Spencer that she can be rather overly sensitive at times.
Before she leaves, Mary questions Spencer on knowing about her stay at Lost
Woods Resort but she quickly comes up with a credible lie. Whilst driving her
car late at night, Mary encounters an abused Hanna Marin over the road and
stops the vehicle. Both exchange looks, with Marin gazing at Drake in mass
hysteria due to looking like a spitting image of Jessica.[11]

During "Bedlam", Mary drives Hanna to Spencer's home, at her request. Later
that day, she visits Spencer again at her workplace to find out if Hanna is
doing alright. After some questions posed by Spencer, Drake tells her the
story of how she ended up in Radley, resulting in an unexpected bond between
the two of them. Visiting The Radley to unlock old memories, Mary encounters
Emily and they discuss Alison's health issues. Drake assures Emily that
Elliott is professional and thinks there is nothing to worry about. They
decide to pay Alison a secret visit at Welby. There, both of them discover
that Alison's mental state has worsened since she mistakes Mary for her
deceased mother. After Elliott discovers their presence, he argues with Mary
about their plans, as she thinks Elliott is crossing the line on Alison's
mistreatment.[12][13]

At the end of "Hit and Run, Run, Run", Mary pays another visit to Alison at
Welby to inform her that she's "in charge" of things.

In "Along Comes Mary", Alison is released from Welby into the care of a
relative, leaving her under the suspicious watch of Mary. Their interactions
are initially tense since Alison questions her aunt's intentions and sudden
return to Rosewood. Mary discloses to Alison that Archer Dunhill (Elliott's
real identity) contacted her in London to inform that Charlotte had died just
hours after her release from medical supervision. Archer also acknowledged his
suspicions that Alison was accountable for her cousin's homicide. Mary admits
that at first she too believed Alison was responsible for her daughter's
murder, presuming she had inherited Jessica's ruthless nature but claims she
stopped assisting Dunhill's schemes once he revealed his true colors. Later on
the episode, the two bond over "Little Sparrow", a song Mary was heard humming
around the DiLaurentis residence about betrayal and heartbreak caused by men,
which coincides with Alison's current situation.

During "Wanted: Dead or Alive", Mary moves back to the Lost Woods Resort in
fear of Archer potentially lurking around town and nearly bashes Spencer with
a bat when she opens the door to her room unannounced. Drake realizes that
Spencer suspects her of keeping Archer concealed and proceeds to tell her that
he "handled Ali with kid gloves" compared to how he treated her. Later, when
Mary drops by the DiLaurentis residence to return some items, Alison questions
her aunt's relationship with Charlotte due to her cousin introducing herself
with the pseudonym CeCe Drake. Mary is in shock to find out about her
daughter's former alias, claiming they never met and that once Charlotte was
born, Jessica immediately took the baby, not even allowing her sister to hold
the newborn. Mary presumes that Charlotte discovered about her existence
either on her own or through Jessica.

In "Original G'A'ngsters", Spencer and Hanna manage to break into Jenna
Marshall's room at The Radley with Caleb's aid, but their investigation
process is quickly interrupted by the sound of someone slowly opening the
door. The person hides Mary's old Radley Sanitarium file inside a secret box
under Jenna's bed and is revealed to be Noel Kahn, who is seen angrily dialing
Dr. Cochran. Meanwhile, Jason DiLaurentis returns to Rosewood and tensions
rise at the DiLaurentis residence when he corners Mary with a court order
appointing him as Alison's primary caretaker. He initially expels Drake from
the property but Alison manages to subdue her brother into getting to know
their aunt. During an awkward family dinner with Aria Montgomery, Jason
accuses Mary of being a master manipulator and she confesses to them that
Jessica had told her Charles died as a teenager in order to withheld
information about her son's transition into a woman. Drake also claims that
her sister spent a lot of time locked in a storm cellar at their Aunt Carol's
house. Later at night, the Liars but Aria go to investigate the location, and
discover Jessica had turned it into her lair. Through photos, Alison realizes
her mother knew she was alive and searched for her whereabouts. Jessica also
kept files on all the Liars and had all of Mary's medical history. Whilst
examining them, Emily discovers that Mary had a second child, Charlotte's
biological sibling. Their gender is undisclosed, but the individual fits the
same age pattern as the Liars.

During "Exes and OMGs", Spencer and Aria track down Dr. Cochran and meet his
daughter whom he has a strained relationship with. She refuses to tell them
where he lives until someone ransacks her home. Upon meeting Cochran, he is
reluctant to discuss his past until the girls bribe him with whiskey. The man
explains that his main function was to take care of "problems" such as
unwanted pregnancies. He further admits that he was responsible for delivering
both of Mary's children when she was hospitalized at Radley. Cochran also
proceeds to reveal that her second child was placed in temporary custody at a
department of county family services. Years passed and his job eventually
caused him to be a liability, so Radley fired him and he lost his license as a
doctor.

In "The Wrath of Kahn", Aria and Jason team up to investigate Mary's past and
discover that Steven Kahn, Noel's father, was the judge who presided over her
second child's adoption.

During "The DArkest Knight", Hanna Marin helds Noel hostage in an attempt to
obtain a confession from him that proves he's their tormentor, but Kahn
doesn't regain consciousness. Impatient, she instead ends up slashing one of
his legs with a knife in order to test his DNA and see if it matches Mary's.
The results later come back negative and Noel ends up escaping. The Liars all
get a text message ordering them to head over to 1465, Elm Street. Once the
girls arrive to the location, they make their way inside an abandoned school
for blind students where they're held hostage by Kahn and Jenna, with the
later tracking down the Liars at gunpoint. During the cat-and-mouse chase,
Emily and Hanna end up fighting Noel which causes him to trip over an axe that
decapitates him. Spencer is subsequently shot by an unknown assailant, giving
Jenna the leverage to finish her off. Nonetheless, Mary emerges from behind
and knocks out Jenna before she could do anything harmful. Whilst A.D. drags
Jenna away from the building, the Liars stumble upon a severely wounded
Spencer laying on Mary's arms. Presuming Drake is accountable for their
friend's critical condition, Mary swears she'd never harm Spencer and
tearfully claims to be her biological mother.

In "Playtime", it's revealed that Mary ran off from the abandoned school for
blind students before the authorities and paramedics showed up at the scene to
aid Spencer. A week later, Veronica Hastings arrives back in Rosewood, finally
concluding the victory cruise she embarked on shortly after being elected
State Senator of Pennsylvania. Spencer discloses to Veronica what Mary had
told her and demands answers about her parentage. After initially resisting to
her daughter's confrontation, Veronica proceeds to explain that one day she
was working on her living room when Jessica DiLaurentis knocked on the door to
have a discussion. Veronica avoided her neighbor at the time, due to Jason
being a product of an affair with her husband Peter. Jessica presented to Mrs.
Hastings a rundown of her troubled history with Mary. Veronica was initially
puzzled as to why her husband's former mistress was telling her about a secret
relative with "emotional problems" until Jessica unfolded that Mary was
pregnant. Unlike her previous pregnancy, the medical staff at Radley was able
to determine who the child's father was because Mary identified him. Mary had
seemingly posed as Jessica at a restaurant where Peter was dining and tricked
him into sleeping with her. The purpose of Jessica's visit was not only to
come clean about her sister carrying on her affair but to also provide
Veronica the option to adopt the baby. Veronica was distressed when she
discovered that her husband had committed infidelity once more but couldn't
stand the thought of Spencer being delivered at a psychiatric hospital and
ultimately deserted. Shortly after Mary gave birth, Veronica alongside Peter
made arrangements with Steven Kahn in order to gain custody of Spencer.
According to Mrs. Hastings, caring for Spencer as if she were her own was the
key to forgiving her marital disputes. Unable to process the truth on how she
came to be, Spencer decides to distance herself from Veronica. Later in the
episode, A.D. challenges Spencer to a truth or dare game, instructing her to
pay a visit to Toby in order to gather a reward. After doing so, A.D. gifts
Spencer with an old letter Mary wrote to her, stating that just because she's
the outcome of a hateful act, doesn't make her vile.

During "These Boots Were Made for Stalking", Spencer asks for detective Marco
Furey to stop by the Hasting's barn. Spencer's initially distraught and
wrestling over whether or not to tell him the truth about Mary but shows Marco
the letter Drake wrote to her, prior to giving birth. Afterwards, she asks for
his help in tracking down Mary's whereabouts. He agrees to do so, and both
head to the police station together. After a quick search, Marco determines
that Drake might've signed into a motel under a different name but not much
has been uncovered.

In "Power Play", Spencer arrives at her barn only to stumble upon her father's
belongings. Amongst Peter's luggage, she finds his passport and discovers that
he arrived in Philadelphia at the same time as Veronica. Peter suddenly
emerges and Spencer engages in a heated argument with her dad, questioning him
as to why he chose to avoid his own daughter. Peter divulges that he was
searching for Mary's whereabouts and trying to assure she wouldn't return to
Rosewood to cause more damage to their family. He further explains that he
wanted to find a way to redeem himself after the emotional rollercoaster he
put his daughter and wife through. When Spencer asks him if he was able to
successfully track down Drake, Peter replies that he's working with a private
investigator in order to do so. Spencer rebukes her father for attempting to
chase Mary away, and storms out. The following day, Hanna is hanging out at
Spencer’s house when she spots the P.I.’s business card from Peter’s
briefcase. She convinces Spencer to infiltrate the investigation in order to
locate Drake, and theorizes that Mary might be able to help point them in the
direction of “A.D.". Afterwards, Hanna picks up the phone and calls the P.I.,
pretending to be someone from Peter's office. After getting help from the
P.I., Hanna and Spencer knock on several doors until they approach one house
and much to their surprise, Pastor Ted Wilson (Hanna's former step-dad) opens
the door. The girls show Ted a picture of Drake and ask him if he has seen
her, to which Wilson informs them that he hasn’t. Hanna offers to grab coffee
with Ted at the Radley later to catch up, and she also asks him to call her if
he happens to spot Mary. As the Liars turn away to leave, Drake shows up in
the doorway. Ted turns to Drake and questions her on what she's truly doing
there. Later, he reaches out to Hanna to talk and they meet up at Lucas' loft,
where Wilson reveals to have lied about Mary's visit. Ted further confesses
that Drake is an ex-girlfriend of his back when he was a college student and
that she met up with him to inform they had a child together. Things get even
more intricate when Wilson discloses to Hanna that said offspring was
Charlotte and that he knew his daughter prior to her sex change. It turns out
that Ted used to run a summer camp for troubled boys, and Charles was a camper
there. Wilson is disheartened when describing that he interacted with a "soft-
spoken, sweet" boy without awareness they were related. Ted then showcases
Hanna a picture of himself back when he worked at the camp, chaperoning
Charles and Lucas Gottesman, whom he described as his son's "only friend".
This shocking revelation leaves Hanna stunned. Later, when Spencer arrives
home, she is reprehended by her father, who is mad that she spent the entire
day looking for Drake. Peter claims that Mary's behavior in the past suggests
she's unhinged. When Spencer demands her father to expose whatever knowledge
he has on Mary, Peter finally gives in and discloses that the last time he saw
Drake was after Spencer came back from rehab. Peter was in the kitchen
drinking a glass of wine when he spotted whom he presumed to be Jessica
quietly descending the staircase and making her way to the front door. Just
before she exited, Peter turned the lights on and confronted her, until the
woman explained to her former lover that she needed to see their daughter,
prompting him to realize that it was actually Mary. Peter further clarifies
that Mary pursued retribution after Jessica told her that Charles committed
suicide in order to withhold information about his transition into a woman.
After Peter refused to aid Drake on her vendetta, Mary used Peter's heart
medication pills to poison her sister and proceeded to bury her on the
Hastings' backyard. At last, Spencer comprehends her father's concern, seeing
as Drake wanted to blame Peter for Jessica's murder. That being said, Spencer
is disappointed to learn that Peter knew about Charlotte's connection to their
family prior to exposing herself as "A". He then assures his daughter that
despite her hard feelings, he'll always guard her from harm.

During "In the Eye Abides the Heart", Spencer visits Marco at the police
station to bring him a box of cupcakes and make small talk about Archer's
severed finger that A.D. sent the authorities. Furey reveals that he spoke
with a nurse at Welby and learned that Mary and Archer had an argument right
before he went missing. Marco deduces that Drake might have been involved in
Archer’s murder, but his suspicions also lean towards Spencer. When Spencer
returns home later that day, she immediately realizes that someone trespassed
her house. Sure enough, the front door to the barn is ajar and a bottle is
poised in front of it, with a note sticking out at the top. She unravels it
quickly, only to reveal a message from Mary that states “Need to talk.”
Spencer writes a response and sticks the paper back inside the bottle. The
following day, Hanna pulls out the box where she previously found Lucas’s
mysterious comic book he wrote with Charlotte, only to realize that it’s
missing. Hanna immediately dials Spencer to inform her, but she dismisses her
quickly in favor of opening up the latest note from Drake, which contains a
single gold key. At night, Spencer unlocks a door at the Lost Woods Resort and
stumbles upon a pile of mail right at the foot of the doorway. Suddenly, she
hears a noise outside, and Furey walks in. He divulges to have followed her,
realizing that Spencer was planning on meeting Mary at the motel. Marco shares
that every theory he has about Dunhill’s death somehow links back to Spencer
and the other Liars. To make matters worse, Furey discloses that he ordered
copies of Archer’s paper receipts to inspect the signature. Spencer
immediately realizes that she accidentally used Archer’s credit card to pay
for the drinks that she and Marco shared that night. Spencer proceeds to exit
the Lost Woods abruptly. At the end of the episode, she receives one more note
from Drake that says "You brought the police. I understand. Goodbye." It turns
out that Mary waited for her daughter at the resort but when she spotted
Furey, she assumed Spencer had tipped him off.

In "Driving Miss Crazy", A.D. blackmails Aria into placing a burner phone with
a pre-made audio recording to play over a sound system at the Hastings
residence. The recording ends up being a secret conversation between Mary and
Peter, which ultimately reveals that Peter and her sister were plotting to
kill her. This leaves Peter in a rage, who begins to frantically search for
Drake around the house, thinking that she might have planted the recording. He
tears the speakers off the walls, instructing his wife and daughter not to
listen to the "delusional ramblings" of a mentally unstable individual. After
hearing the conversation playing on a loop, Veronica considers contacting the
authorities but Spencer persuades her mother not to call the police. Later at
night, Marco confronts Spencer outside her home, after learning that she is
Caleb's ex-girlfriend. Furey further points out their romantic involvement
gives Caleb enough motivation to protect her and cause a flood at The Radley
that destroyed all of the hotel's security footage. Spencer threatens to
embarrass Marco at the police station with personal details about their
relationship, prompting him to drive off. After she gets in her car, Drake who
was hiding in the backseat, covers Spencer's mouth and orders her to drive to
the Lost Woods in order to explain her version of events. Mary denies planting
the recorded conversation at the Hastings household, but isn't regretful
Spencer heard it. After Spencer points out how Drake committed a heinous
crime, Mary tells her not to judge. Through a flashback, we learn that Drake
was told by Peter she would never see their daughter again. Peter and Jessica
came up with a plan to use Peter’s heart medication pills to kill her. Mary
thwarted the plan and killed Jessica with his pills before burying the body at
the Hastings' backyard. Feeling like she was cheated out of the chance to know
Spencer, Drake asks her daughter to come live under the radar with her.
Afterwards, Spencer goes home to confront her father. When she gets there, her
parents are reading the letter Mary wrote to her. Peter, once again, tries to
warn Spencer that Drake is manipulating her. Spencer alludes to her dad’s
involvement in the murder plot against Mary, but Peter makes no apologies for
his actions. He clears up that his intention was to protect his family from a
"deranged sociopath", and that he'd do so again if necessary. Peter storms out
and Veronica informs Spencer that she is dropping out of the Senate due to
fear of Peter's wrong doings becoming public knowledge. Spencer meets up with
Drake again, but this time it's to say goodbye. Mary assures Spencer she
understands, and in return she implores her biological mother to forgive
herself in order to move on with her life.

During "Farewell, My Lovely", Spencer notices a message from Drake in a wine
bottle while she was with the other Liars. Following its instructions, Spencer
headed to the Lost Woods where she found Mary awaiting her. Preparing to leave
town, Drake divulges to her daughter that she put the resort's deed in her
name and Alison’s so they could use it for money in case they needed legal
assistance. Mary further states that preventing Lieutenant Tanner from
obtaining arrest warrants for her family was the least she could do. Later
that day, Mona confesses to having murdered Charlotte after realizing that her
mental health hadn't improved and her true intentions were to torture the
Liars again. This revelation led to the final pieces of the puzzle being left
for the Liars to find on Hanna’s car. They placed the pieces into the board
game, which A.D. had moved to the DiLaurentis residence. The phone from the
game bid the Liars congratulations and through augmented reality informed them
the grand prize was to discover Archer’s corpse buried at Carol Ward's house.
The girls rushed over there with shovels to dig the body up but Aria persuades
her friends to stop playing the game and walk away. As they did, Tanner and
the authorities turned up and the girls were all taken into custody. Fearing
that they were about to be charged with first degree murder, the Liars are
shocked to observe Drake in the interrogation room confessing to the murders
of Dunhill and Jessica. While the Liars (minus Alison) knew she was
accountable for her sister's homicide, they were shocked to witness Mary take
the fall for Archer's involuntary vehicular manslaughter. Tanner allows the
girls to walk away free but made it clear that she knew Drake wasn't
accountable for Dunhill's death. Spencer tearfully watches Mary get taken away
and whilst the two briefly make eye contact, Drake puts her finger to her
lips, instructing Spencer not to stop her from sparing them a prison sentence.

In "Till Death Do Us Part", a year has passed since A.D. went off the radar
after obtaining closure in relation to Charlotte's murder. Mary, now an
inmate, receives a visit from her daughter Alex, posing as Spencer, who asks
for a favor. Later that day, A.D. orders Mona to walk around in a mask of
Melissa Hastings' face to gain their trust. After successfully obeying their
orders, Vanderwaal heads to Spencer's barn to knock her unconscious.
Thereupon, Spencer wakes up in a cell and looks at what she believes to be a
mirror. Alex, unable to keep up the ruse, quits impersonating a reflection.
Spencer is visibly puzzled, and Alex startles her. She starts laughing
gleefully as Mary walks up behind her and makes her way into Spencer's room,
where she states they didn't think she'd wake up so early. Mary then injects
Spencer with a sedative, causing her to fall asleep instantaneously. A few
hours later, Spencer awakens once more, only this time attached to a holter
monitor and with a foot chained to a bed. She comes face to face with Alex in
tremendous stupefaction, who informs Spencer that their mother is preparing a
special lunch for the three of them. Alex proceeds to share with Spencer
details about the circumstances that lead to avenging their half-sister's
memory before leaving for Aria and Ezra's wedding. A few hours later, Mary
suddenly shows up to deliver Spencer's lunch and is met with accusations of
having a helping hand in Alex's maneuvers. Mary reminds Spencer that she's a
wanted convict for a murder she didn't commit. This causes Spencer to ask
where they are but Mary is unaware of the location, however, Drake mentions
that Alex promised to keep both of them secure. Spencer interrogates Mary on
why she never told her about Alex's existence, to which Mary declares being
unsure whether Alex was alive or not until she paid her a visit a few weeks
earlier. According to Mary, the existence of a second twin was unbeknownst to
the Hastings, since Alex was born minutes after Spencer had already been given
to Peter and Veronica. Mary, desperate to escape Radley, allowed Doctor
Cochran to arrange Alex's adoption in exchange for $500,000 and a resignation
from the psychiatric hospital. Alex was later adopted by a wealthy British
couple. However, she started to develop mental health problems at an early
age, and the family that fostered her refused to tarnish their reputation.
Alex was then stripped off her adoptive name and placed into an orphanage
under her birth name. On her tenth birthday, Alex ran away from the Ambrose
Home for Wayward Children, a year before Mary discovered she was there. Drake
proceeds to unlock the code to Spencer's cell and the two share an emotional
embrace. Spencer takes advantage of the momentum to steal one of Mary's hair
pins and then uses it to pick the locks of her and Ezra's rooms. Later that
day, Alex is then spotted angrily leaving a house with Mary in tow. Mary
points out that Alex promised she wouldn't injure Spencer, and she angrily
proclaims her need to dispose of "the proof" before grabbing an ax off the
side of the building. Drake states that if they leave straightaway, they can
arrange a mother-daughter trip to Europe. Alex insists that she's not going
anywhere without Toby and claims he's in love with her. Mary responds that
Toby's in love with Spencer, which causes Alex to furiously yell that she
already became her sister. Mary notifies Alex that she knows what it feels
like to want something so badly that you start to believe it's true. Alex
wisecracks that she can't fathom her mother's words and punches Mary in the
nose, knocking her out. Through Mona's assistance, Alex is eventually caught
by the other Liars, Toby and Caleb and brought into custody by a police
officer. Vanderwaal reveals that the elusive figure in a black hoodie who paid
her a visit at Welby earlier in the episode was Wren Kingston, hellbent on
killing her under Alex's orders. However, Mona persuaded A.D. into sparing her
life by helping Mary escape prison. At an unknown time, Vanderwaal is seen
running a doll store in France. Once she finishes selling an item to a
customer, the officer who arrested Alex and Mary walks inside to greet Mona
with a kiss, implying they were somehow in cahoots. They make ensuing dinner
plans and after he exits the shop, Vanderwaal heads to a basement. A dollhouse
is set up with two dolls seated in the upper division, to which Mona voices
that it's tea-time before handing them a toy teapot. Behind the dollhouse, a
light goes on in a room that shows Alex and Mary, who are costumed as life-
sized dolls while sipping tea together. Alex unleashes a heavy sigh, and Mary
professes to her daughter that Vanderwaal can't hold them hostage
indefinitely. Alex, embracing the unavoidable, rolls her eyes and elucidates,
"Of course she can, she's Mona". She then irritably glares through the glass
at Vanderwaal, who is also sipping tea and looking utterly satisfied, knowing
she has finally taken control of the "A" game again and owns two dolls of her
own.

It is highly implied during the first episode that she escaped, along with
Alex Drake, from Mona Vanderwaal’s dollhouse in Paris and are now on the run.

