The **Negro Ensemble Company** (NEC) is a New York City-based theater company
and workshop established in 1967 by playwright Douglas Turner Ward,
producer/actor Robert Hooks, and theater manager Gerald S. Krone, with funding
from the Ford Foundation. The company's focus on original works with themes
based in the black experience with an international perspective created a
canon of theatrical works and an audience for writers who came later, such as
August Wilson, Suzan-Lori Parks, and others.

The Negro Ensemble Company was created in 1964 when Hooks created a tuition-
free acting workshop for urban youth which he named the Group Theatre Workshop
(GTW), in tribute to Harold Clurman's The Group Theatre. The group became a
refuge for young minority actors, with a focus on black theatre. He and his
associate Barbara Ann Teer produced in a one-night showcase for friends and
family of the actors. The plays chosen were Gwendolyn Brooks' _We Real Cool_
and Douglas Turner Ward's _Happy Ending_.

Jerry Tallmer, reviewer for the _New York Post_ , happened to attend this
showcase and gave it a glowing review.[1] This inspired Hooks to produce
_Happy Ending_ and Ward's _Day of Absence_ as a double bill presented by
Robert Hooks Productions. After raising $35,000 from music executives Clarence
Avant and Al Bell, Hooks booked the St. Mark's Playhouse (where many black
performers had performed in the long-running show, _The Blacks_) and hired
Gerald Krone as company manager.

Ward was invited by the _New York Times_ to write an opinion piece for its
Sunday edition on the state of black theatre. His piece "American Theatre: For
Whites Only?", published in August 1966, was a scathing indictment of
America's theatre establishment and posited the need for a unique black
theatre institution.[2]

This article caused McNeil Lowery of the Ford Foundation contact Ward to set
up a meeting with Ward, Hooks, and Krone.[3] Invited to present a proposal,
they came with a bid for an ensemble company much like Bertolt Brecht's
Berliner Ensemble. The concept of a true ensemble company (a nucleus of actors
performing a roster of plays back-to-back within each season) was uncommon in
American theatre. A theatre based on the black experience, created and staffed
by black artists, was even more of a departure. In the legacy of the Group
Theatre Workshop, this new theatre incorporated a workshop providing tuition-
free acting, directing, writing, and theatre administration instruction, which
was intended to raise a new generation of theatre professionals. The proposal
was accepted and they were awarded a three-year, $1.5 million grant to
establish the company.

From the beginning, they resisted demands that the new company be located in
Harlem and instead sought out a space downtown where they could build on the
existing theatre audience while cultivating an informed black theatre-going
audience which hadn't previously existed on a significant scale. They chose
the St. Mark's Playhouse primarily because of its flexible configuration.

During this era of Black Power, the decision to use the term "Negro" rather
than the more current "Black" was controversial. The name was intended as a
tribute to the Harlem Renaissance and the legacy of its artists (Langston
Hughes, Zora Neal Hurston, Countee Cullen, Jessie Fauset, Claude McKay, Ethel
Waters, etc.), some of whom were still alive and living in New York at the
time. The term "New Negro", made popular by philosopher and journalist Alain
Locke, was used during the Harlem Renaissance to invoke an outspoken advocacy
of dignity and a refusal to submit to the practices and laws of Jim Crow.

Krone, who was serving as administrative director for the company, was
Caucasian, which caused some vocal protest from black nationalists.[4][5]

When introducing the Negro Ensemble Company, the three founders wanted to
inform New York and the world that they were not "an exclusionary... but an
inclusive... black theatre; an arts institution dedicated to discovering,
nurturing and expanding a theatrical exploration of what it was to be black
within in a 'world view' perspective _."_[6] Part of this approach was to
acknowledge that playwrights of many races, ethnicities, and nationalities had
been, and were currently, writing about the experiences of Africans and
African Americans, and about colonialism.

The first repertory season, 1967-1968, was not without controversy. The
company presented _Summer of the Seventeenth Doll_ by Australian playwright
Ray Lawler; _Kongi's Harvest_ by Nigerian playwright Wole Soyinka, _Daddy
Goodness_ by Richard Wright, and as their first play, _Song of the Lusitanian
Bogey_ by Swedish-German playwright Peter Weiss. Weiss' play addresses the
oppression of black people from an international perspective, set in colonized
Angola. Some black activists protested, accusing NEC of taking "white money"
and for producing the work of a white playwright. On one occasion, activists
attempted to storm the theatre during a performance of Weiss' play. Soon
afterward, the NEC's production of _Song of the Lusitanian Bogey_ in London
created further controversy, where the company was heckled by right-wing
protesters who resented the play's anti-imperialist message.

Many of the plays produced by the Negro Ensemble Company dealt with complex,
sometimes disturbing, and often ignored aspects of the black experience and
the American experience. The company's nurturing of black playwrights (such as
Lonne Elder III's _Ceremonies in Dark Old Men_ and Charles Fuller's _Zooman
and The Sign_ ) over four decades contributed to the body of plays and
performance literature which form the backbone of the African-American
theatrical canon.[7]

While the company often received glowing reviews and had sold-out audiences,
and was producing some of the critically acclaimed theatre of the era, the
early 1970s found the Negro Ensemble Company in financial trouble. The
145-seat theatre had become too small to generate the revenue needed for its
ambitious projects. During the 1972-73 season, the resident company was
disbanded, staff was cut, workshops were cancelled, and salaries were
deferred. The decision was made to produce only one new play per year.

The play chosen that year was _The River Niger_ by Joseph A. Walker. A poetic
play set in Harlem during the turbulent racial redefining of the 1970s, the
work depicts the struggles of a proud black family divided between the past
and the future. This was the first NEC production to transfer to Broadway,
where it ran for nine months, won a Tony Award for Best Play, and embarked on
a national tour. This helped to ensure the continued existence of the NEC.

In July 1980, the NEC relocated to a new 299-seat home at Theatre Four at 424
West 55th Street, where it would remain until 1991.[8] In 1981, the NEC
presented what would be its most successful production. _A Soldier's Play_ by
Charles Fuller is the story of the murder of a black soldier on a Southern
army base during World War II, and the subsequent investigation by a black
army captain. It examines black pride and black self-hatred, and won both the
Pulitzer Prize and the New York Drama Critics Circle Best Play awards. The
original cast included Adolph Caesar, Denzel Washington, Samuel L. Jackson,
Brent Jennings, Charles Brown, Larry Riley, Peter Friedman, Cotter Smith,
James Pickens Jr., Eugene Lee, and Stephen Zettler. In 1984, it was made into
a movie, featuring several original cast members and NEC alumni (notably
Adolph Caesar, Denzel Washington, and David Alan Grier). The film of _A
Soldier's Story_ was nominated for three Academy Awards.

In 2005, the Negro Ensemble Company, Inc., a restructured incarnation of the
original Negro Ensemble Company, was formed, with NEC alumna Charles Weldon as
Artistic Director. It was among 406 New York City arts and social service
institutions to receive part of a $20 million grant from the Carnegie
Corporation, which was made possible through a donation by New York City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg.[9]

