**NewsNet** is an American news-oriented free-to-air television network that
is owned by NewsNet LLC. The network is structured to broadcast a tightly-
formatted 30-minute newswheel 24 hours a day (with a 90-minute breakaway on
weekend mornings), incorporating freshly-updated information that covers
various areas of interest (such as national news, sports, entertainment,
weather and business). Breaking news stories are updated constantly as they
develop and new information becomes available.

In addition to being carried on digital subchannels of affiliated television
stations, NewsNet also distributes its programming through a livestream that
is available on its website (yournewsnet.com), as well as mobile apps in areas
where it does not have a terrestrial TV affiliate. NewsNet's operations are
based out of the studios of WMNN-LD on West 13th Street and 3rd Avenue in
Cadillac, Michigan.

On September 28, 2017, Eric Wotila – who founded low-powered all-news station
WMNN-LD in Cadillac, Michigan, and oversaw the studio design and construction
for News Channel Nebraska, a Norfolk, Nebraska-based quasi-state network of
five low-powered stations that also maintained an all-news programming format
– started a crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter to fund the launch of a
24-hour national news channel – under the working title, the Local News
Network (LNN) – intended for broadcast, online and mobile
distribution.[2][3][4][5]

Citing favorable opinions from viewers about the "straight-to-the-facts, no-
nonsense and commentary-free" coverage provided by WMNN-LD, the Local News
Network proposed to offer a news wheel format (similar in structure to the
1982–2005 format of HLN, and the formats of defunct all-news networks such as
All News Channel and Satellite News Channel) that would eschew the often-
politically focused panel discussion programs that have populated the
afternoon, nighttime and weekend schedules of cable news channels
(particularly CNN, MSNBC and Fox News Channel) since the early 2000s. The
project called for LNN to be based out of WMNN's Cadillac studio facility,
with the hope of eventually opening bureaus elsewhere around the United
States. The project failed to reach its funding goal of $100,000 needed to
develop LNN – which would have been used to pay for equipment and staffing
necessary to handle the national broadcasts – by the closure of the 50-day
campaign on November 17, 2017, raising only $8,012 from 78 public backers.
Wotilla subsequently sought to obtain backing from investors to fund the
venture.[2][3][4][5]

On March 15, 2018, Wotilla and other partners involved in the Local News
Network project announced the launch of NewsNet, which would maintain the
concept originally developed prior to the commencement of the Kickstarter
campaign.[6][7][8]

NewsNet was officially launched on January 1, 2019 at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time,
with the _Evening Edition_ serving as the network's inaugural program. On May
8, 2019, ground was broken on new studios. The facility will consist of 3
studios, each with their own control rooms and a new, state-of-the-art master
control room overseeing the operations of NewsNet, WMNN-LD and WXII-LP.[9]

The channel's programming is structured around a rolling news wheel format,
providing up-to-date information on the top national and international stories
in just 30 minutes. Each half-hour of the wheel format begins with a two-
minute-long look at the leading headlines of the moment (with updated details
provided when breaking news develops), followed by an eight-minute selection
of additional headlines at 02 and 32 minutes past the hour. The remainder of
the block features a national weather forecast summary (at 12 and 42 minutes
past the hour), sports scores and headlines (at 17 and 47 minutes past the
hour), "Health News," a segment focusing on the latest health headlines or
“Living Well” (at 24 minutes past the hour) and "Around America," a segment
focusing on stories centering around unique attractions and people around the
United States (at 54 minutes past the hour).[10]

To comply with programming guidelines imposed by the Children's Television
Act, NewsNet also carries a 90-minute block of educational children's
programming on Saturday and Sunday mornings at 10:30 a.m. ET.

Aside from the one mentioned below, NewsNet also utilizes correspondents from
CNN Newsource via an outsourcing agreement.

As of September 2019[update], NewsNet has current and pending affiliation
agreements with 43 television stations in 41 television markets encompassing
22 states, covering 26.99% of the United States.[1]

In addition to allowing affiliates to sell local advertising (offering four
minutes of local commercial time per hour to prospective stations), NewsNet
provides the option for its broadcast affiliates to pre-empt the "Health
News", "Living Well" and "Around America" segments at the end of each half-
hour to allow to carry a five-minute-long local headline "capsule", providing
news and weather information focusing on the local viewing area. NewsNet also
provides an optional turnkey local news production service for stations that
do not maintain their own local news departments to produce local news capsule
segments or full-length newscasts.[10][11][6][7][8]

