**NHL Network** is an American sports-oriented cable and satellite television
network that is a joint venture between the National Hockey League (which owns
a controlling 84.4% interest) and NBCUniversal (which owns the remaining
15.6%). Dedicated to ice hockey, the network features live game telecasts from
the NHL and other professional and collegiate hockey leagues, as well as NHL-
related content including analysis programs, specials and documentaries.

The channel's headquarters and studios are located in the Secaucus, New Jersey
facilities also utilized by MLB Network.

Launched on October 1, 2007, the NHL Network was developed out of a joint
venture between the NHL and cable provider Comcast, as part of a broadcast
rights agreement that resulted in the NBC Sports Network (then known as
Outdoor Life Network) acquiring partial cable television rights to regular
season, and Stanley Cup playoff and finals games from the National Hockey
League.[2]

The NHL Network originally shared some programming with its former sister
network in Canada, with the main differences in programming between the two
networks being the carriage of domestically targeted commercials and live game
telecasts; NHL Network in the U.S. primarily carries broadcasts from Canadian
national rightsholders (such as CBC's _Hockey Night in Canada_ , Sportsnet,
and formerly TSN), while the Canadian feed primarily carried games from U.S.
broadcasters. The channel also picks up simulcasts of games from regional
rightsholders; live games on NHL Network that involve U.S. teams are non-
exclusive, and are blacked out in the markets of U.S. teams involved in favor
of local broadcasters.

The league hired Ascent Media to manage and distribute the channel, through
its publicly traded subsidiary, Ascent Media Network Services. When it
launched, the NHL Network became the third sports-oriented cable network
devoted to programming from and controlled by a major sports league, following
the National Basketball Association-owned NBA TV (which launched in March
1999) and the National Football League-owned NFL Network (which launched in
November 2003); Major League Baseball would launch its own sports channel, MLB
Network, on January 1, 2009.

On June 1, 2015, _The Globe and Mail_ columnist David Shoalts reported that
NHL Network in Canada would cease operations on September 1, 2015; national
media rights to the NHL in Canada had been acquired by Rogers Communications
beginning in the 2014-15 season, and the Bell Media staff members who managed
the network's Canadian arm on behalf of the NHL were laid off that July.[3][4]

In August 2015, it was announced that the NHL had reached a six-year deal with
Major League Baseball Advanced Media (MLBAM) to take over the management of
the NHL's digital properties, as well as NHL Network. Operations and
production of NHL Network's programming was shifted from Toronto to the
Secaucus, New Jersey facilities of MLB Network.[3][5] There has been minor
talent sharing between the networks, and MLB Network cross-promoted an NHL
Stadium Series game at Coors Field by building a scale hockey rink in its
Studio 42 (which itself is designed to resemble a scaled baseball field).[6]
For much of the 2015-16 season, NHL Network studio programs originated from
redressed versions of existing MLB Network sets (much of the NHL regular
season falls during the MLB offseason). In April 2016, coinciding with the
start of the playoffs, NHL Network introduced its own 1,200 square-foot
studio, "The Rink".[7]

Comcast, owners of the league's current cable partner NBCSN, is also the
largest cable television provider in the United States. The company was
contractually obligated to carry NHL Network on its systems by the summer of
2007 at the latest, so it would be available in time for the 2007–08 NHL
season.[8] Both Comcast and the NHL had an option to terminate their contract
after the 2006–07 season, which would have voided Comcast's obligation to
launch a U.S. version of NHL Network, but opted to proceed with the launch.[9]

Since its official launch in the United States, the NHL Network announced on
October 8, 2007 that it would begin being carried that month on Cablevision,
Charter, Cox Communications, DirecTV, Dish Network, Xfinity and Time Warner
Cable through carriage agreements that were struck with each of the
providers.[10] DirecTV has aired NHL Network on channel 215 since October 31,
2007.[11][12] Going forward, any provider that already carries NHL Center Ice
was expected to begin carrying NHL Network on one of its programming tiers.
Some providers offer NHL Network's high definition simulcast feed, which
broadcasts all live games in HD.

NHL.com announced on January 12, 2009 that AT&T U-verse would begin carrying
the channel.[13] This was followed on June 2, 2009 with the announcement that
NHL Network and Comcast had reached an agreement to carry the channel on the
provider's Digital Classic Tier, which increased subscribership of the channel
from the then-estimated two million subscribers in its placement on the
"Sports Entertainment" tier to over 10 million on its Digital Classic
package.[14] Internationally, the network began to be distributed in Taiwan in
2010 on satellite provider DishHD.

The channel is also available on over-the-top services like DirecTV Now
(Through Grandfathered plans only that were only available before revamp) and
Sling TV.

On October 1, 2011, AT&T U-verse dropped NHL Network due to a carriage dispute
over a planned increase in retransmission payments.[15] On November 18, 2016,
the NHL Network returned to AT&T U-verse following a five-year hiatus.

