In natural and social sciences, and sometimes in other fields, **quantitative
research** is the systematic empirical investigation of observable phenomena
via statistical, mathematical, or computational techniques.[1] The objective
of quantitative research is to develop and employ mathematical models,
theories, and hypotheses pertaining to phenomena. The process of measurement
is central to quantitative research because it provides the fundamental
connection between empirical observation and mathematical expression of
quantitative relationships.

Quantitative data is any data that is in numerical form such as statistics,
percentages, etc.[1] The researcher analyses the data with the help of
statistics and hopes the numbers will yield an unbiased result that can be
generalized to some larger population. Qualitative research, on the other
hand, inquires deeply into specific experiences, with the intention of
describing and exploring meaning through text, narrative, or visual-based
data, by developing themes exclusive to that set of participants.[2]

Quantitative research is widely used in psychology, economics, demography,
sociology, marketing, community health, health & human development, gender
studies, and political science; and less frequently in anthropology and
history. Research in mathematical sciences, such as physics, is also
"quantitative" by definition, though this use of the term differs in context.
In the social sciences, the term relates to empirical methods originating in
both philosophical positivism and the history of statistics, in contrast with
qualitative research methods.

Qualitative research produces information only on the particular cases
studied, and any more general conclusions are only hypotheses. Quantitative
methods can be used to verify which of such hypotheses are true. A
comprehensive analysis of 1274 articles published in the top two American
sociology journals between 1935 and 2005 found that roughly two thirds of
these articles used quantitative method.[3]

Quantitative research is generally closely affiliated with ideas from 'the
scientific method', which can include:

Quantitative research is often contrasted with qualitative research, which
purports to be focused more on discovering underlying meanings and patterns of
relationships, including classifications of types of phenomena and entities,
in a manner that does not involve mathematical models.[4] Approaches to
quantitative psychology were first modeled on quantitative approaches in the
physical sciences by Gustav Fechner in his work on psychophysics, which built
on the work of Ernst Heinrich Weber. Although a distinction is commonly drawn
between qualitative and quantitative aspects of scientific investigation, it
has been argued that the two go hand in hand. For example, based on analysis
of the history of science, Kuhn concludes that “large amounts of qualitative
work have usually been prerequisite to fruitful quantification in the physical
sciences”.[5] Qualitative research is often used to gain a general sense of
phenomena and to form theories that can be tested using further quantitative
research. For instance, in the social sciences qualitative research methods
are often used to gain better understanding of such things as intentionality
(from the speech response of the researchee) and meaning (why did this
person/group say something and what did it mean to them?) (Kieron Yeoman).

Although quantitative investigation of the world has existed since people
first began to record events or objects that had been counted, the modern idea
of quantitative processes have their roots in Auguste Comte's positivist
framework.[6] Positivism emphasized the use of the scientific method through
observation to empirically test hypotheses explaining and predicting what,
where, why, how, and when phenomena occurred. Positivist scholars like Comte
believed only scientific methods rather than previous spiritual explanations
for human behavior could advance.

Quantitative methods are an integral component of the five angles of analysis
fostered by the data percolation methodology,[7] which also includes
qualitative methods, reviews of the literature (including scholarly),
interviews with experts and computer simulation, and which forms an extension
of data triangulation.

Quantitative methods have limitations. These studies do not provide reasoning
behind participants' responses, they often do not reach underrepresented
populations, and they may span long periods in order to collect the data.[8]

Statistics is the most widely used branch of mathematics in quantitative
research outside of the physical sciences, and also finds applications within
the physical sciences, such as in statistical mechanics. Statistical methods
are used extensively within fields such as economics, social sciences and
biology. Quantitative research using statistical methods starts with the
collection of data, based on the hypothesis or theory. Usually a big sample of
data is collected – this would require verification, validation and recording
before the analysis can take place. Software packages such as SPSS and R are
typically used for this purpose. Causal relationships are studied by
manipulating factors thought to influence the phenomena of interest while
controlling other variables relevant to the experimental outcomes. In the
field of health, for example, researchers might measure and study the
relationship between dietary intake and measurable physiological effects such
as weight loss, controlling for other key variables such as exercise.
Quantitatively based opinion surveys are widely used in the media, with
statistics such as the proportion of respondents in favor of a position
commonly reported. In opinion surveys, respondents are asked a set of
structured questions and their responses are tabulated. In the field of
climate science, researchers compile and compare statistics such as
temperature or atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide.

Empirical relationships and associations are also frequently studied by using
some form of general linear model, non-linear model, or by using factor
analysis. A fundamental principle in quantitative research is that correlation
does not imply causation, although some such as Clive Granger suggest that a
series of correlations can imply a degree of causality. This principle follows
from the fact that it is always possible a spurious relationship exists for
variables between which covariance is found in some degree. Associations may
be examined between any combination of continuous and categorical variables
using methods of statistics.

Views regarding the role of measurement in quantitative research are somewhat
divergent. Measurement is often regarded as being only a means by which
observations are expressed numerically in order to investigate causal
relations or associations. However, it has been argued that measurement often
plays a more important role in quantitative research.[9] For example, Kuhn
argued that within quantitative research, the results that are shown can prove
to be strange. This is because accepting a theory based on results of
quantitative data could prove to be a natural phenomenon. He argued that such
abnormalities are interesting when done during the process of obtaining data,
as seen below:

In classical physics, the theory and definitions which underpin measurement
are generally deterministic in nature. In contrast, probabilistic measurement
models known as the Rasch model and Item response theory models are generally
employed in the social sciences. Psychometrics is the field of study concerned
with the theory and technique for measuring social and psychological
attributes and phenomena. This field is central to much quantitative research
that is undertaken within the social sciences.

Quantitative research may involve the use of _proxies_ as stand-ins for other
quantities that cannot be directly measured. Tree-ring width, for example, is
considered a reliable proxy of ambient environmental conditions such as the
warmth of growing seasons or amount of rainfall. Although scientists cannot
directly measure the temperature of past years, tree-ring width and other
climate proxies have been used to provide a semi-quantitative record of
average temperature in the Northern Hemisphere back to 1000 A.D. When used in
this way, the proxy record (tree ring width, say) only reconstructs a certain
amount of the variance of the original record. The proxy may be calibrated
(for example, during the period of the instrumental record) to determine how
much variation is captured, including whether both short and long term
variation is revealed. In the case of tree-ring width, different species in
different places may show more or less sensitivity to, say, rainfall or
temperature: when reconstructing a temperature record there is considerable
skill in selecting proxies that are well correlated with the desired
variable.[10]

In most physical and biological sciences, the use of either quantitative or
qualitative methods is uncontroversial, and each is used when appropriate. In
the social sciences, particularly in sociology, social anthropology and
psychology, the use of one or other type of method can be a matter of
controversy and even ideology, with particular schools of thought within each
discipline favouring one type of method and pouring scorn on to the other. The
majority tendency throughout the history of social science, however, is to use
eclectic approaches-by combining both methods. Qualitative methods might be
used to understand the meaning of the conclusions produced by quantitative
methods. Using quantitative methods, it is possible to give precise and
testable expression to qualitative ideas. This combination of quantitative and
qualitative data gathering is often referred to as mixed-methods research.[11]

