**Rivalry in Dixie** is the name given to the **Louisiana Tech–Southern Miss
football rivalry**.[1] It is a college football rivalry game between the
Louisiana Tech Bulldogs and Southern Miss Golden Eagles.[2]

La Tech won the first game of the series 27–0 on November 28, 1935. La Tech
and USM were conference foes in the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic
Association from 1935–41. In addition, La Tech and USM were both founding
members of the Gulf States Conference, which began play in 1948. The two
football programs competed against each other every season from 1946–72.

The Bulldogs and Golden Eagles played 11 times from 1975–92. The name of the
rivalry was coined by Mississippi Southern alumnus and Louisiana Tech head
football coach Maxie Lambright. Following the Bulldogs' 23–22 victory over the
Golden Eagles in 1976, Lambright declared, "This is the finest rivalry in
Dixie." Thereafter, the event became known as "Rivalry in Dixie."

The word "Dixie" refers to privately issued currency from banks in
Louisiana.[3] These banks issued ten-dollar notes,[4] labeled "Dix", French
for "ten", on the reverse side. The notes were known as "Dixies" by English-
speaking southerners, and the area around New Orleans and the French-speaking
parts of Louisiana came to be known as "Dixieland". Eventually, usage of the
term broadened to refer to most of the Southern United States.

Southern Miss is known for the "World-Famous Dixie Darlings." The USM dance
team was established in 1954 as the Dixie Maids. However, after only one week
of existence, the band director Dr. Raymond Mannoni decided to change their
name to the Dixie Darlings after a Mobile reporter remarked "Look at those
delightful darlings of Dixie" after seeing the Dixie Darlings perform. The
Dixie Darlings debuted at the Mississippi Southern vs. Alabama game in
Montgomery on September 17, 1954. Since then, the Dixie Darlings have become a
fixture at Golden Eagle football games.[5] In addition, the Pride of
Mississippi Marching Band plays "Are You from Dixie?" following the extra
point attempt following a Golden Eagle touchdown.

The historic Dixie Theatre is a landmark in the heart of downtown Ruston,
Louisiana. The theater was built in 1928 as the Astor Theater and showed films
and presented concerts. The theater was renamed in 1932 as the Rialto and
become the Dixie Theatre in the 1950s after being purchased by the Dixie
Theater Corporation of New Orleans. The famous flashing star crowning the
marquee was added in 1956. In 1996, the Dixie Center of the Arts was
established to reinstate the Dixie Theatre as a center for entertainment and
the arts in downtown Ruston as it hosts full seasons of events, parties, and
concerts.[6]

In 2008, La Tech athletics director and head football coach Derek Dooley and
USM athletics director Richard Giannini signed a four-game contract to renew
the rivalry. Giannini stated, "We look forward to renewing our series with
Louisiana Tech, one of our oldest rivalries in terms of games, and a quality
opponent in the Western Athletic Conference."[7] In 2010, Southern Miss won
the first game of the renewed series 13–12 on a rainy night in Ruston.[8] The
two teams opened their 2011 season in Hattiesburg in spite of heavy rain and
high winds from Tropical Storm Lee on Saturday, September 3, 2011 on Fox
Sports Net. Southern Miss won a nail-biter 19–17 thanks to a last minute field
goal by Danny Hrapmann.

With Louisiana Tech's move to Conference USA in 2013, Rivalry in Dixie is once
again a conference rivalry. Currently, Southern Miss leads the series 34–15
over Louisiana Tech.[9]

