**Samuel A. DiPiazza, Jr.** , was CEO of PricewaterhouseCoopers from January
1, 2002 until 2009. Prior to that, he served as chairman of the PwC U.S firm.

He received dual degrees in accounting and economics from the University of
Alabama where he became a member of Theta Chi Fraternity. He then went on to
get his Master of Accountancy from the University of Houston. He is a licensed
CPA.[1]

He started work with the firm Coopers & Lybrand, one of the two firms along
with Price Waterhouse, that merged in 1998 to form PricewaterhouseCoopers.
DiPiazza joined C&L in 1973 and was named partner six years later in 1979.
Later in his career he was chosen to head first the Birmingham, Alabama, and
then the Chicago offices. In 1992 he was appointed managing partner of the
Midwest region. In 1994 he moved to a position in the New York office, similar
to his previous one, and added client service vice president to his resume.
Finally, in 2000 he was elected chairman and senior partner of the United
States firm, a role he filled until 2002 when he took over the role of
chairman and managing partner for the firm as a whole.

DiPiazza served a three-year term as a trustee of the Financial Accounting
Foundation. He also serves on the International Advisory Board of Junior
Achievement, the Executive Council of the Inner City Scholarship Fund and is
President of Big Brothers Big Sisters New York City. He serves on the
Executive Committee of the National Corporate Theater Fund and as a board
member with the New York City Ballet. He is also on the board of the World
Trade Center Memorial Foundation. He has stepped down as the Chairman of PwC
on June 30, 2009.[2] On October 12, 2005, Mr. DiPiazza was appointed to a
second four-year term as chairman of the PricewaterhouseCoopers global,
beginning on January 1, 2006. He stepped down as the Global Chairman on June
30, 2009 making way for Dennis Nally.[2]

Recently, Mr. DiPiazza has been a member of the Committee on Capital Markets
Regulation which has been mandated to assess the impact of the current U.S.
regulatory environment on the competitiveness of the U.S. in the global
capital marketplace. On January 21, 2014[3] Mr. DiPiazza was elected to the
ProAssurance Board of Directors as the Chairman of the Audit Committee.

Mr. DiPiazza is also chair of the board of trustees for Mayo Clinic, a
position he has held since February 2014.[4]

