**SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory** , originally named **Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center** ,[2][3] is a United States Department of Energy National
Laboratory operated by Stanford University under the programmatic direction of
the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science and located in Menlo Park,
California.

SLAC research centers on a broad program in atomic and solid-state physics,
chemistry, biology, and medicine using X-rays from synchrotron radiation and a
free-electron laser as well as experimental and theoretical research in
elementary particle physics, astroparticle physics, and cosmology.

Founded in 1962 as the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, the facility is
located on 172 hectares (426 acres) of Stanford University-owned land on Sand
Hill Road in Menlo Park, California—just west of the University's main campus.
The main accelerator is 3.2 kilometers (2 mi) long—the longest linear
accelerator in the world—and has been operational since 1966.

Research at SLAC has produced three Nobel Prizes in Physics:

SLAC's meeting facilities also provided a venue for the Homebrew Computer Club
and other pioneers of the home computer revolution of the late 1970s and early
1980s.

In 1984 the laboratory was named an ASME National Historic Engineering
Landmark and an IEEE Milestone.[7]

SLAC developed and, in December 1991, began hosting the first World Wide Web
server outside of Europe.[8]

In the early-to-mid 1990s, the Stanford Linear Collider (SLC) investigated the
properties of the Z boson using the Stanford Large Detector.

As of 2005, SLAC employed over 1,000 people, some 150 of whom were physicists
with doctorate degrees, and served over 3,000 visiting researchers yearly,
operating particle accelerators for high-energy physics and the Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL) for synchrotron light radiation
research, which was "indispensable" in the research leading to the 2006 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry awarded to Stanford Professor Roger D. Kornberg.[9]

In October 2008, the Department of Energy announced that the Center's name
would be changed to SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. The reasons given
include a better representation of the new direction of the lab and the
ability to trademark the laboratory's name. Stanford University had legally
opposed the Department of Energy's attempt to trademark "Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center".[2][10]

In March 2009 it was announced that the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
was to receive $68.3 million in Recovery Act Funding to be disbursed by
Department of Energy's Office of Science.[11]

In October 2016, Bits and Watts launched as a collaboration between SLAC and
Stanford University to design "better, greener electric grids". SLAC later
pulled out over concerns about an industry partner, the state-owned Chinese
electric utility.[12]

The main accelerator was an RF linear accelerator that accelerated electrons
and positrons up to 50 GeV. At 3.2 km (2.0 mi) long, the accelerator was the
longest linear accelerator in the world, and was claimed to be "the world's
most straight object."[13] until 2017 when the European x-ray free electron
laser opened. The main accelerator is buried 9 m (30 ft) below ground[14] and
passes underneath Interstate Highway 280. The above-ground klystron gallery
atop the beamline, the longest building in the United States[ _citation
needed_ ], is easily distinguishable from the air and is marked as a visual
waypoint on aeronautical charts.[15]

A portion of the original linear accelerator is now part of the Linac Coherent
Light Source.

The Stanford Linear Collider was a linear accelerator that collided electrons
and positrons at SLAC.[16] The center of mass energy was about 90 GeV, equal
to the mass of the Z boson, which the accelerator was designed to study. Grad
student Barrett D. Milliken discovered the first Z event on 12 April 1989
while poring over the previous day's computer data from the Mark II
detector.[17] The bulk of the data was collected by the SLAC Large Detector,
which came online in 1991. Although largely overshadowed by the Large
Electron-Positron Collider at CERN, which began running in 1989, the highly
polarized electron beam at SLC (close to 80%[18]) made certain unique
measurements possible, such as parity violation in Z Boson-b quark coupling.[
_citation needed_ ]

Presently no beam enters the south and north arcs in the machine, which leads
to the Final Focus, therefore this section is mothballed to run beam into the
PEP2 section from the beam switchyard.

The SLAC Large Detector (SLD) was the main detector for the Stanford Linear
Collider. It was designed primarily to detect Z bosons produced by the
accelerator's electron-positron collisions. The SLD operated from 1992 to
1998.

PEP (Positron-Electron Project) began operation in 1980, with center-of-mass
energies up to 29 GeV. At its apex, PEP had five large particle detectors in
operation, as well as a sixth smaller detector. About 300 researchers made
used of PEP. PEP stopped operating in 1990, and PEP-II began construction in
1994.[19]

From 1999 to 2008, the main purpose of the linear accelerator was to inject
electrons and positrons into the PEP-II accelerator, an electron-positron
collider with a pair of storage rings 2.2 km (1.4 mi) in circumference. PEP-II
was host to the BaBar experiment, one of the so-called B-Factory experiments
studying charge-parity symmetry.

The Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) is a synchrotron light
user facility located on the SLAC campus. Originally built for particle
physics, it was used in experiments where the J/ψ meson was discovered. It is
now used exclusively for materials science and biology experiments which take
advantage of the high-intensity synchrotron radiation emitted by the stored
electron beam to study the structure of molecules. In the early 1990s, an
independent electron injector was built for this storage ring, allowing it to
operate independently of the main linear accelerator.

SLAC plays a primary role in the mission and operation of the Fermi Gamma-ray
Space Telescope, launched in August 2008. The principal scientific objectives
of this mission are:

The Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology (KIPAC) is
partially housed on the grounds of SLAC, in addition to its presence on the
main Stanford campus.

The Stanford PULSE Institute (PULSE) is a Stanford Independent Laboratory
located in the Central Laboratory at SLAC. PULSE was created by Stanford in
2005 to help Stanford faculty and SLAC scientists develop ultrafast x-ray
research at LCLS. PULSE research publications can be viewed here.

The Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) is a free electron laser facility
located at SLAC. The LCLS is partially a reconstruction of the last 1/3 of the
original linear accelerator at SLAC, and can deliver extremely intense x-ray
radiation for research in a number of areas. It achieved first lasing in April
2009.[20]

The laser produces hard X-rays, 109 times the relative brightness of
traditional synchrotron sources and is the most powerful x-ray source in the
world. LCLS enables a variety of new experiments and provides enhancements for
existing experimental methods. Often, x-rays are used to take "snapshots" of
objects at the atomic level before obliterating samples. The laser's
wavelength, ranging from 0.13 to 6.2 nm (200 to 9500 electron volts
(eV)[21][22] is similar to the width of an atom, providing extremely detailed
information that was previously unattainable.[23] Additionally, the laser is
capable of capturing images with a "shutter speed" measured in femtoseconds,
or million-billionths of a second, necessary because the intensity of the beam
is often high enough so that the sample explodes on the femtosecond
timescale.[24][21]

The LCLS-II project is to provide a major upgrade to LCLS by adding two new
X-ray laser beams. The new system will utilize the 500 m (1,600 ft) of
existing tunnel to add a new superconducting accelerator at 4 GeV and two new
sets of undulators that will increase the available energy range of LCLS. The
advancement from the discoveries using this new capabilities may include new
drugs, next-generation computers, and new materials.[25]

In 2012, the first two thirds (~2 km) of the original SLAC LINAC were
recommissioned for a new user facility, the Facility for Advanced Accelerator
Experimental Tests (FACET). This facility was capable of delivering 20 GeV, 3
nC electron (and positron) beams with short bunch lengths and small spot
sizes, ideal for beam-driven plasma acceleration studies.[26] The facility
ended operations in 2016 for the constructions of LCLS-II which will occupy
the first third of the SLAC LINAC. The FACET-II project will re-establish
electron and positron beams in the middle third of the LINAC for the
continuation of beam-driven plasma acceleration studies in 2019.

The Next Linear Collider Test Accelerator (NLCTA) is a 60-120 MeV high-
brightness electron beam linear accelerator used for experiments on advanced
beam manipulation and acceleration techniques. It is located at SLAC's end
station B. A list of relevant research publications can be viewed here.

