**Sri Lankan Malay** (also known as _Sri Lankan Creole Malay,_ _Bahasa Melayu,
Ja basawa, and Java mozhi_ ) is an Austronesian language formed through a
mixture of Sinhala and Shonam (Sri Lanka Muslim Tamil), with Malay being the
major lexifier.[3] During the 17th and 18th centuries, the Dutch who had
occupied Batavia of Java exiled native rebels and royalty to Sri Lanka, and
they made their first settlements in Hambantota and Kirinde. Later on, the
Dutch also garrisoned their military, composed of Malays, in other parts of
Sri Lanka. As a result, some scholars even believe that SLM is closely
associated with the Batavian dialect of Malay. [4] Sri Lankan Malay (SLM), is
found in the Central (Kandy), Southern (Hambantota and Kirinde), and Western
(Slave Island) provinces of the country. The Malay population living in
Kinniya and Mutur no longer speak Malay and have resorted to either Sri Lankan
Tamil or Sri Lankan Moor Tamil (SLMT). [4]The majority of the speakers today
reside in Northern Colombo.[3] Sri Lankan Malays now constitute 0.3% of the
Sri Lankan population, which is approximately 46,000 people.[5]The exact
number of speakers is unknown and there are no linguistic statistics available
on the number of speakers living in or outside Sri Lanka. Based on the ethnic
statistics of Sri Lankan Malays, the estimation of the number of Sri Lankan
Malay speakers is between 30,000 to 40,000. [3]

As the language has been influenced by Sinhala, Tamil, and English, SLM
speakers constantly code-switch between SLM and either one or two of the other
mentioned languages. [4]As a result, SLM within the three mentioned provinces,
have taken a distinctive character of their own. Sebastian Nydorf has produced
“A Grammar of Upcountry Malay” highlighting the said regional variations,
however, his efforts have been criticised for having widening disparities
within the language. [4] Due to these differences, there are contesting
opinions among the SLM speakers themselves: while some speakers say that Malay
in Kirinde and Hambantota is of higher status due to its closeness to archaic
Malay, others claim that Malay of Slave Island is more vibrant in its
evolution, especially in its use of slang which has even been adopted by the
Moors.[4] A result of this variation within spoken SLM is a call for
standardisation in the written variety, in accordance with _Bahasa Kumpulan_
(standardised Malay in Malaysia and Indonesia). [4]

Malays who first arrived in Sri Lanka, keeping with their customs and
practices, used the _gundul_ alphabet for writing, which was the Arabic script
with five additional letters.[4] This practice had survived till the
mid-1940s, and had only been used among specific individuals (such as
religious/communal figures) and served limited and exclusive purposes as a
minority language within the country. For instance, Malay bills of marriage (
_kavin_ ) were drawn in _gundul_. [4] Presently, however, both “Standard
Malay” (SM) and SLM use the Romanized script for writing purposes. Some of the
advocates of the Romanised script claim that using English in accordance with
(their interpretation of) Standard British English must be the only way of
writing Malay. For instance, using ‘ch’ instead of the letter ‘c’ for the /ch/
sound (failing to realise that ‘ch’ could also produce the /k/ sound). Other
users and scholars of SLM claim that Sinhala, being a phonetical alphabet,
would be better suited for writing Malay as it would better capture Malay
pronunciation. [4] Much studies have not been done on the particular variety
of SLM but there are debates that SLM is endangered. “ Much work remains to be
done on the various varieties of SLM” [6]. In Colombo community, parents
encourage their children to speak in English therefore SLM is endangered in
that community . With regard to the Cosmopolitan Colombo community, where the
level of education is high, the community typically shows strong linguistic
vitality in SLM in the oldest to middle generations and rapidly decreasing
linguistic competence (to nil) in the vernacular in the young generation.[7]
In sharp contrast is the speech community of Kirinda, with low education and
employment levels who still have SLM as a dominant language .[8] The current
thrust in the SLM community is that some segments of the community especially
those in Kirinda, are of the opinion that SLM language must be encouraged,
taught and strengthened while others in the Colombo community are of the
opinion that Malaysian or Indonesian Malay should be taught as means of
revitalizing SLM by converging it with a more standardized variety.The Kirinda
community in Hambantota is one of the few communities that speak Sri Lankan
Malay as their dominant language. Although children in the Kirinda community
remain monolingual speakers of Sri Lankan Malay before they enter primary
school, the speakers of Sri Lankan Malay today are insufficient to maintain
the language in future generations. In some communities, Sri Lankan Malay is
clearly endangered but there is a debate about whether it is endangered
overall since some communities have robust first language speakers.[3][9]

Trilingualism is achieved by SLM community due to contact with the larger
group of Tamil and the majority of Sinhalese speakers because Sinhala and
Tamil were adstrates. Therefore the restructuring process that occurs in SLM
has a number of grammatical categories which are absent from other Malay
varieties, but are found in both Sinhala and Tamil. Considering that mixed
languages typically show lexical items predominantly from one source, and
grammatical material predominantly from another, SLM lexicon is primarily of
PMD origin while grammatical features are derived from Sinhala and Tamil.
Therefore the use of inflections is largely due to a process of typological
congruence of Lankan adstrates. Dative and accusative are marked by suffixes
attached to a noun (naƞ-DAT yaƞ-ACC) . The verb final order follows the
Sinhala and Tamil typology. This is illustrated as follows:[10]

ni aanak-naƞ baek buku-yaƞ attu aada

This student-DAT good book-ACC one exist

“This student has a good book.”

As in Tamil, accusative tends to mark definiteness in SLM.

Inni kendera -yaƞ bapi

This chair-ACC take. go

“Take _this_ chair away.”

A direct influence of Sinhala is seen in Ablative syncretism marker (to
indicate source) riɧ.

Market-riƞ ais-tra baaru ikkaƞ billi bawa

Market-ABL ice-NEG new fish buy bring

Get me some fresh fish from the market

The SLM possessive case suffix is ‘pe’ , derived form of Malaya punya “to
possess” distinguishes a feature of contact Malay varieties such as Bazaar
Malay and Baba Malay.

goppe tumman go-yaƞ e-tolak

My friend pushed me

As an archaic feature of Malay lingua franca , it is most likely that this
feature was maintained from the original varieties of the SLM community and
its adaptation led to the development of a new case that distinguishes SLM
from its adstrates. [11]

