The **Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource** (formerly Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory), a division of SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory, is operated by Stanford University for the Department of Energy.
SSRL is a National User Facility which provides synchrotron radiation, a name
given to electromagnetic radiation in the x-ray, ultraviolet, visible and
infrared realms produced by electrons circulating in a storage ring (Stanford
Positron Electron Asymmetric Ring - SPEAR) at nearly the speed of light. The
extremely bright light that is produced can be used to investigate various
forms of matter ranging from objects of atomic and molecular size to man-made
materials with unusual properties. The obtained information and knowledge is
of great value to society, with impact in areas such as the environment,
future technologies, health, and education.[1]

The SSRL provides experimental facilities to some 2,000 academic and
industrial scientists working in such varied fields as drug design,
environmental cleanup, electronics, and x-ray imaging.[2] It is located in
southern San Mateo County, just outside the city of Menlo Park.

In 1972 the first x-ray beamline was constructed by Ingolf Lindau and Piero
Pianetta as literally a "hole in the wall" extending off of the SPEAR storage
ring. At that time, the SPEAR had been built in an era of particle colliders,
where physicists were more interested in smashing particles together in hope
of discovering antimatter than in using x-ray radiation for solid state
physics and chemistry. From those meager beginnings the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Project (SSRP) began. Within a short time SSRP had five experimental
hutches sharing the radiation of only a few inches of the curved SPEAR dipole
magnets. Each one of those stations was equipped with a monochromator to
select the radiation of interest, and experimenters would bring their samples
and end stations from all over the world to study the unique effects only
achieved through synchrotron radiation. Today the SPEAR storage ring is
dedicated completely to the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource as part
of the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory facility. SSRL currently operates
24/7 for about nine solid months out of the year; the remaining time is used
for major maintenance and upgrades where direct access to the storage ring is
needed. There are over 30 unique experimental stations which are made
available to users from universities, government labs, and industry from all
over the world.

_listed byBeamline and Station_

Coordinates: 37°25′06.2″N 122°12′03.5″W﻿ / ﻿37.418389°N 122.200972°W﻿ /
37.418389; -122.200972

