**Sydney Driscoll** is a fictional character in the Freeform television series
adaption of the _Pretty Little Liars_ book series, portrayed by Chloe Bridges.
Driscoll is introduced as a false protagonist, only to be exposed as a member
of Mona's army and a close friend of Jenna Marshall. Sydney returns in the
series' seventh season, later revealed to be a helper of "A.D." and a member
of the A-Team.[1][2][3]

On April 3, 2014, it was announced that Chloe Bridges was cast as Sydney
Driscoll.[4] Showrunner I. Marlene King stated that she had wanted Bridges for
the role of Sydney for a few seasons, but waited until she would be able to
cast her.[5]

The character is introduced in the fifth-season episode "Surfing the
Aftershocks", as a new swimmer at Rosewood High. She befriends Emily, who
begins helping her with her swimming. Driscoll initially appears to be a sweet
and soft-spoken student with an identity crisis,[6] although she's later
revealed to be working against the Liars.

Emily first notices Sydney in "Surfing the Aftershocks", staring at her by the
staircase at Rosewood High and later again at the lockers. Thinking that she
is staring because of Alison, Emily confronts her, only for Sydney to disclose
that she admires her swimming talent and would love to hear Emily's opinions
on her own abilities. At first, Emily is hesitant, but agrees to help
Driscoll. Having watched Sydney swim, Emily and Driscoll head into the locker
rooms, where Emily begins to measure Sydney's height to arm span ratio. Paige
walks in and starts helping Emily, leading to an awkward conversation filled
with suggestive innuendos.

Walking into the locker rooms in "Thrown From the Ride", Sydney is
disappointed in her 58-second time. Emily informs Driscoll that her technique
has gotten better and then asks if they want to meet up the next day. Sydney
replies that she'll have to ask her parents first, but it should be okay.
Emily explains that her mother keeps asking questions about Alison's return to
Rosewood, and Sydney tells her it's only natural and that she has questions
too. The following day, Sydney meets Emily in the locker room and apologises
for being late. Emily asks if Paige wants to join them, and Sydney backs her
up, saying they're only doing sprints on the track. At the Pizzeria in town,
Driscoll is spotted with Emily and Paige grabbing some food.

As Alison walks into school during "Miss Me x 100", Paige tells Sydney she
can't stay and leaves. In the locker room, Sydney discloses to Emily that the
school's Glee club is sponsoring a Frozen sing along event, but Emily displays
very little interest. Sydney reminds her that there will be free pizza and
that Emily will avoid "playing 20 questions with her mother" in regards to
Ali's return. Emily agrees to go. In the Rosewood High courtyard, Sydney and
Emily are buying popcorn, when Paige divulges that Jenna is back in town and
Shana is deceased. She explains to Sydney that Marshall is a blind girl who
used to attend Rosewood High, and that her and Shana were in a romantic
relationship. Emily is uncomfortable and explains to Sydney that Jenna and
Alison hate each other and that she alongside the other Liars were drafter
into their feud. When the Liars walk into the cafeteria at school, Mona and
her army - including Sydney - confront the girls, with Mona coming forward and
exposing Alison's lie with a video that proves Ali slapped her at the town's
church. Near the end of the episode, Driscoll and Marshall step out of Jenna's
car, pulling up a picnic ground. Sydney comments on the mustang parked in
front of them, and Jenna discloses to Driscoll that it used to be hers.
Walking over to Mona, Sydney informs her that the Liars do not want things to
go back to the way they were. Jenna further divulges that they remember the
way Alison treated them. Mona is happy to hear this and muses that maybe they
can get rid of Alison. The three girls turn to look as a third car pulls up.

During "The Silence of E. Lamb", Sydney walks out of a stall in the girls'
bathroom as Alison and Emily are talking. She introduces herself to Alison and
compliments her scarf. Sydney later discloses to Emily that someone left a rat
in Paige's locker after practice. When Emily asks who did it, Sydney tells her
no one has fessed up, and the coach wants a team meeting, but Sydney doesn't
think it was someone on the Sharks as everyone loves Paige. Emily comments
that she hasn't seen Paige yet, and Sydney deduces she skipped school. As
Emily walks up to Mona and asks what she knows about Paige's incident, Mona
greets Sydney, and Sydney greets her back. At the Brew, Driscoll is standing
behind Hanna in the line where she introduces herself and mentions that she's
having a hot date with her homework. After asking if Hanna's on her way out,
Hanna replies she just had dinner at Emily's. Sydney senses a whiff of alcohol
coming from Hanna's breath and asks if she would like to sit for a minute.
When Hanna tells her she's just going to head home, Sydney suggests Hanna to
wait for her so they can split a Panini. During their meal, Sydney lifts a
newspaper that has the Cavanaugh house explosion on the front, and mentions to
Hanna that she was just reading about what happened. Hanna says that they were
at Emily's house when it happened, and when Driscoll asks if she knew who
lived in the house, Hanna tells her that their friend Toby grew up there with
his stepsister Jenna. Sydney states that Jenna's name keeps popping up, and
that people seem to have a lot of beef with her and asks Hanna if she's ever
wanted to make peace with Hanna. Hanna informs her that there was always the
possibility that they could have done so and almost slips about the events
that took place in New York with Shana. Having grabbed some more coffee,
Sydney suggests dropping off Hanna off at home, but Hanna tells her she'll
walk home instead. After asking if she's sure, Driscoll picks up her books and
tells Hanna that she'll see her at school before walking out.

In "Scream For Me", Sydney is changing in the Rosewood High locker rooms when
Emily approaches her. Emily couldn't watch practice because she got hung up in
the language lab before thanking Sydney for helping Hanna sober up the night
before. She questions Sydney about what Hanna might've said and whether she
mentioned New York. Sydney says she didn't and wonders why Emily really came
into the locker rooms. Sydney discloses to Emily the team wants her to be the
assistant coach, but Emily says she already has a lot going on. Walking into
Emily's bedroom, Sydney hands Emily the hooded sweatshirt and says she got
ahead of herself. She explains that since they've stopped training together,
Driscoll just wanted to have someone in the bleachers cheering for her, since
her boyfriend is off in college and her parents aren't into it. Sydney lets it
slip that she knows Emily and her friends were in New York, but covers when
Emily points out her lie by saying she must've been mixed up from too much
time in the pool.

Walking out of a consulting room during "March of Crimes", Jenna and Sydney
stop when Emily calls out Sydney. As Emily asks Driscoll what she's doing at
the Optometrists office, Marshall explains that Sydney was her ride, before
asking if it posed a problem. Emily wonders when Jenna and Sydney became
friends, and when Marshall attempts to get Sydney to walk away with her,
Spencer instructs Sydney to answer Emily's questions. Stepping in, Jenna says
that it sounded more like an accusation, and when Emily asks Driscoll why she
never mentioned being friends with Jenna. This leads to a heated argument, and
Marshall eventually leaves accompanied by Sydney. Later on the episode,
Driscoll reveals to Emily that she met Jenna when she volunteered at a school
for the visually impaired and have remained friends ever since the day Alison
visited Marshall to threaten her. Driscoll returned to Rosewood per Marshall's
request, fearing that Alison would bully her once more. In order to get back
at Sydney for her betrayal, Emily decides to accept the coaching position in
order to keep an eye on her as much. Emily then proceeds to drive away and
leave Driscoll stood up in the middle of the street.

Throughout "How the 'A' Stole Christmas", Jenna is part of the school choir
who are singing Christmas songs for the Shady Days Nursing Home, alongside
Paige, Emily, Lucas and Sydney. Unbeknownst at the time, Jenna is one of
Alison's followers at the Masquerade Ice Ball. Still wearing a mask, Jenna and
another one of Alison's followers, later revealed as Driscoll, pose for a
photo with Lucas, who is dressed as Santa Claus. Lucas tells the two masked
beauties to come in closer, and after the photo is taken, he wishes them a
Merry Christmas. After gaining Emily's attention, Marshall and Sydney begin
walking through the crowd, with Driscoll looking over her shoulder to make
sure Emily would follow her trace. As Emily enters the room which has been
draped off with fabric, Jenna sits on the couch, while Sydney reveals herself
to Emily and explains that she led Emily to an isolated location because she
didn't want Alison to witness them talking. As Driscoll walks towards Jenna,
Emily tells Sydney that she really gets around, and questions if Jenna knows
Sydney is with Alison now. Jenna then takes off her mask and reveals to Emily
they suspect Alison of being accountable for Mona's murder.

In "The DArkest Knight", Mona and Caleb manage to bug Jenna's cellphone and
eavesdrop a voice message she left for Noel after he failed to return any of
her calls. Afterwards, Hanna contacts Mona to help her return to Rosewood with
a convincing narrative after having abducted Noel. Once Hanna successfully
fabricates a story to the police on how she went to Hollybrook to track down
the girl Kahn pushed down a flight of stairs at a frat party, Mona purposely
bumps into Marshall at The Radley. Jenna is given an ultimatum to conspire
with the Liars, after Mona implies that Marshall's partnership with Noel would
send both of them to prison. Jenna initially subdues to Mona's coercion,
seeing as her and Caleb later await for Marshall by the Radley's bar.
Nonetheless, Jenna manages to trick the duo after hiring Sydney to pose as a
decoy and serve them coffee in order to buy Marshall sufficient time to track
down the Liars at gunpoint at an abandoned school for blind students.[7]

Throughout "Hold Your Piece", Aria and Emily team up to track down Sydney's
whereabouts in hopes of finding Jenna. After searching her name online, they
discover that Driscoll graduated from Berkeley College, with a double major in
Economics and French. Sydney currently resides in a loft at Fishtown,
Philadelphia, whilst working as a bank teller at a private department that
services extremely wealthy clients. The girls also learn that Sydney checked
into a charity gala for the Manhattan Children's Hospital, the same ball where
Katherine made an appearance wearing Hanna's dress. Following this
enlightenment, Emily googles the event and comes across a picture of Daly
posing on a red carpet whilst Driscoll sneakily uses a phone to photograph her
dress. The girls deduce that Sydney's loyalty to Marshall places her as the
strongest contender serving as Spencer's shooter. They conclude Driscoll most
likely made adjustments for Marshall to be clothed in a duplicate of Hanna's
dress so Jenna could omit the truth from the authorities. Aria promptly
suggests for her and Emily to head over to Sydney's address to gather more
insight into the situation. Following a quick lesson from Caleb on spying
techniques, Aria instructed Emily to approach Driscoll and clone her phone.
During a conversation with Emily at an outdoor diner, Sydney explains that she
tried to distance herself from Marshall over the years. Driscoll further adds
that she did the coffee delivery unbeknownst that Noel and Jenna were
intending to kill the girls. Their interaction is cut short once Sydney
informs Emily that she has conference calls all afternoon. However, this
information is quickly proven to be false. Through access to Driscoll's phone,
the girls discover that Sydney had an appointment at the Vogel Vision
Institute and eavesdrop the meeting. Turns out Driscoll was paying for an
operation to give Jenna her sight back and she uttered the initials "A.D." as
the donor for the cost. After Sydney exits the clinic, Aria and Emily
aggressively confront her. Driscoll still claimed to not knowing where
Marshall was, so Aria slipped a tracker in her bag to maintain her under their
radar.[8]

In "Power Play", Emily reveals that Driscoll played them and left the device
on a greyhound to Philadelphia. Aria receives a FaceTime call from a blocked
number on her iPad. Once she answers, we see "A.D." in a black hoodie on the
other end. The mysterious entity divulges to Aria they own a stolen file from
Jessica DiLaurentis' burnt lair at Carol Ward's storm cellar containing
information that could send Ezra to jail. Aria immediately disconnects the
call, marches over to the board game, and hurls her player piece across the
room. Later in the episode, Aria and Alison are following the game's
directions for Ali's turn. Abruptly, the game phone starts making a quacking
sound in Ali's purse, which confuses the two girls momentarily until Aria
spots a nearby store called the Darling Duck. Suddenly, Aria gets another
FaceTime request on her phone, so she urges Ali to go inside, assuring her
that she'll meet her in a minute. When Aria glances down at her phone, she
sees a message from "A.D." that reads: “Meet me now,” with a GPS location. She
immediately turns and heads in the opposite direction of the store to her
secret rendezvous with "A.D.". Once Aria arrives at the specified location,
she makes her way inside a black limo, where she's greeted by "A.D.", revealed
to be Sydney. Aria begins to question her about of all of the things she had
done to them, namely shooting Spencer, helping Jenna escape, and creating the
board game. Sydney admits to doing so and attempts to lure Aria into A-Team.
As the two are talking, Aria notices that Sydney is using an earpiece to
communicate with the driver and confronts her about it, revealing that Sydney
is not "A.D." and is just a member of the team. Sydney reveals that Aria has
earned her first piece of "A.D.'s" trust by leaving Ali and agreeing to meet
her in the limo. When Aria questions Sydney's motives for being on the A-Team,
she explains that working for their enemy means being a part of the "winning
team". After being dropped off, Aria reunited with her friends but didn't
mention anything about her run-in with Sydney. She received a text message
from "A.D." asking if she had made a decision about Sydney's offer.[9]

During "Till Death Do Us Part", Spencer's identical twin sister, Alex Drake is
revealed to be the elusive "A.D." Spencer questions her sister about the blind
school shooting, asking if it was her and Sydney who were there shooting. Alex
reveals that Sydney was not there, meaning she previously lied to Aria, and
then describes Sydney as merely a "one-off". Alex reveals she blackmailed
Sydney to work for her after finding out that she was stealing from the bank
she works at and because she fit the "A" hoodie.

When Driscoll was revealed to be one of "A.D."'s minions, reception was
largely positive. De Elizabeth from _Teen Vogue_ was particularly favorable
towards the scene when Sydney offers Aria Montgomery a chance to work with the
Liars' tormentor.[10] Gavin Hetherington from _SpoilerTV_ labeled her reveal
as an accomplice a "sigh of relief".[8]

