Television news in the United States has evolved over many years. It has gone
from a simple 10- to 15-minute format in the evenings, to a variety of
programs and channels. Today, viewers can watch local, regional and national
news programming, in many different ways, any time of the day.

Lowell Thomas hosted the first-ever, regularly scheduled news broadcast on
television in 1940 which was simply a simulcast of his nightly NBC network
radio newscast, with the television broadcast seen only in New York City over
pioneer NBC television station WNBT (now WNBC). The television simulcast
lasted for only a few months.

The first serious attempt at dedicated television news broadcasts in the
United States was by CBS. Upon becoming commercial station WCBW (now WCBS-TV)
in 1941, the pioneer New York CBS television station broadcast two daily news
programs, at 2:30 and 7:30 p.m. weekdays, anchored by Richard Hubbell. Most of
the newscasts featured Hubbell reading a script with only occasional cutaways
to a map or still photograph.

When Pearl Harbor was bombed on Sunday, December 7, 1941, Ray Forrest, WNBT’s
announcer, broke into the broadcast of the movie Millionaire Playboy with news
of the attack. According to The Magic Window: American Television, 1939-1953,
news of the attack on Pearl Harbor constituted television’s first bulletin and
Sam Cuff of WNBT’s _Face of the War_ stood in front of a map showing viewers
where the Japanese attacks occurred.

WCBW (which was usually off the air on Sunday to give the engineers a day
off), took to the air at 8:45 PM with an extensive special report. The
national emergency even broke down the unspoken wall between CBS radio and
television. WCBW executives convinced radio announcers and experts such as
George Fielding Elliot and Linton Wells to come down to the Grand Central
Station studios during the evening and give information and commentary on the
attack. The WCBW special report that night lasted less than ninety minutes.
But that special broadcast pushed the limits of live television in 1941 and
opened up new possibilities for future broadcasts. As CBS wrote in a special
report to the FCC, the unscheduled live news broadcast on December 7 “was
unquestionably the most stimulating challenge and marked the greatest advance
of any single problem faced up to that time.” Additional newscasts were
scheduled in the early days of the war.

In May 1942, WCBW (like almost all television stations) sharply cut back its
live program schedule and the newscasts were canceled, since the station
temporarily suspended studio operations, resorting exclusively to the
occasional broadcast of films. This was primarily due to the fact that much of
the staff had either joined the service or were redeployed to war related
technical research, and to prolong the life of the early, unstable cameras
which were now impossible to repair due to the wartime lack of parts. In May,
1944, as the war began to turn in favor of the Allies, WCBW reopened the
studios and the newscasts returned, briefly anchored by Ned Calmer, and then
by Everett Holles.[1]

After the war, expanded news programs appeared on the WCBW schedule—renamed
WCBS-TV in 1946—first anchored by Milo Boulton, and later by Douglas Edwards.
On May 3, 1948, Douglas Edwards began anchoring _CBS Television News_ , a
regular 15-minute nightly newscast on the rudimentary CBS Television Network,
including WCBS-TV. It aired every weeknight at 7:30 PM, and was the first
regularly scheduled, network television news program featuring an anchor (as
mentioned, the nightly Lowell Thomas NBC radio network newscast was simulcast
on television locally on NBC's WNBT—now WNBC—for a time in the early 1940s and
the previously mentioned Richard Hubbell, Ned Calmer, Everett Holles and Milo
Boulton on WCBW in the early and mid-1940s, but these were local television
broadcasts seen only in New York City). The NBC Television Network's regularly
scheduled news offering at the time _NBC Television Newsreel_ (premiered
February 1948) was simply film with voice narration.

In 1950, the name of the nightly news was changed to _Douglas Edwards and the
News_ , and the following year, it became the first news program to be
broadcast on both coasts, thanks to a new coaxial cable connection, prompting
Edwards to use the greeting "Good evening everyone, coast to coast." The
broadcast was renamed the _CBS Evening News_ when Walter Cronkite replaced
Edwards in 1962.[2] Edwards remained with CBS News with various daytime
television newscasts and radio news broadcasts until his retirement on April
1, 1988.

There were irregularly scheduled, quasi-network newscasts originating from
NBC's WNBT in New York City and reportedly fed to WPTZ (now KYW-TV) in
Philadelphia and WRGB in Schenectady, NY prior to the regularly scheduled _NBC
Television Newsreel_ , such as Esso sponsored news features a well as _The
Face of War_ and _The War As It Happens_ in the final days of World War II,
irregularly scheduled NBC television news and newsreel programs which were
also seen in New York, Philadelphia and Schenectady on the relatively few
(roughly 5000) television sets which existed at the time. Later in 1948, when
sponsored by Camel Cigarettes, _NBC Television Newsreel_ was renamed _Camel
Newsreel Theatre_ and then, when John Cameron Swayze was added as an on-camera
anchor in 1949, the program was renamed _Camel News Caravan_.

On CBS in 1948, _CBS Television News_ premiered on the network in May with on-
camera anchor Douglas Edwards, later retitled _Douglas Edwards and the News_.
CBS Television also featured public affairs programs such as _Longines
Chronoscope_ which featured newsworthy public figures, and which ran from June
1951 to April 1955 at 11pm ET.

The DuMont Television Network had _The Walter Compton News_ (June 1947 –
1948), _I.N.S. Telenews_ and _Camera Headlines_ (1948–1949), and _DuMont
Evening News_ (September 1954-1 April 1955).

However, Edward R. Murrow is widely regarded as the most important figure in
the early days of U.S. television news. On his weekly news show _See It Now_
on CBS, Murrow presented live reports from journalists on both the east and
west coasts of the United States—the first program with live simultaneous
transmission from coast to coast. _See It Now_ focused on a number of
controversial issues, but its most memorable moment was a 30-minute special on
March 9, 1954, entitled "A Report on Senator Joseph McCarthy," which
contributed to the eventual political downfall of the senator.

NBC's _Camel Newsreel Theatre_ was later expanded to 15 minutes and renamed
_Camel News Caravan_ when John Cameron Swayze was added as an on-camera anchor
in 1949. The show was succeeded by the _Huntley-Brinkley Report_ in 1956,
featuring a duo-anchor format with Chet Huntley and David Brinkley. On
September 9, 1963, the _Huntley-Brinkley Report_ expanded to 30 minutes,
following a similar move by CBS. It was renamed _NBC Nightly News_ in 1970,
after Huntley's retirement. Initially, _NBC Nightly News_ was presented by two
anchors from a rotating group of three: Brinkley, John Chancellor, and Frank
McGee. A year later, Chancellor became sole anchor, and Brinkley provided
commentaries. (McGee became host of _Today_.) In 1976, Brinkley rejoined the
program as co-anchor. He continued in that role until 1979, when Chancellor
resumed anchoring the program solo. Chancellor moved to the role of
commentator in 1982 and was succeeded by a team of Tom Brokaw in New York and
Roger Mudd in Washington. Brokaw became sole anchor in 1983.

CBS launched _CBS Television News_ in May 1948 to compete against the NBC
newsreel programs, hosted on camera by Douglas Edwards, it was renamed
_Douglas Edwards with the News_ in 1950. In 1962, Walter Cronkite landed the
anchor seat, which he would hold until 1981, and the program's name was
changed to _CBS Evening News_. On September 2, 1963, the show expanded from 15
to 30 minutes. In the 1970s, _CBS Evening News_ was the dominant newscast on
American television, and Cronkite was often cited as the "most trusted man in
America." After Cronkite's retirement in 1981, Dan Rather became the anchor of
_CBS Evening News_. He was joined by co-anchor Connie Chung from 1993 to 1995.

_ABC Evening News_ began airing in 1953, hosted by John Charles Daly. Daly had
been a well-known CBS radio correspondent, though today he is best remembered
as the emcee of CBS's long-running game show, _What's My Line?_ , which he
hosted while serving as ABC's anchorman. Daly left ABC in 1960 and was
succeeded by a frequently expanding list of successors that included John
Cameron Swayze, Bill Laurence, Bill Sheehan, Ron Cochran, a young Peter
Jennings, and Bob Young. In 1968, Frank Reynolds became anchor of the program,
and it soon expanded from 15 minutes to 30 minutes. A year later, Howard K.
Smith joined as co-anchor, reporting from Washington. In early 1971, Harry
Reasoner left CBS News and replaced Reynolds as the New York anchor. Reasoner
became the sole anchor in 1975, and Smith provided commentaries. In 1976,
Barbara Walters joined the program as Reasoner's co-anchor in New York, thus
becoming the first woman to serve as a regular network news anchor. (Marlene
Sanders had previously served as an occasional substitute anchor). Other women
who would occasionally appear in daytime and weekend anchor roles in earlier
days were Pauline Frederick of ABC and NBC and Nancy Dickerson of NBC. From
the early 1970s forward, females such as Lesley Stahl of CBS, Carole Simpson
of ABC and Jessica Savitch of NBC began to appear in significant on-camera
newscasting roles. Reasoner was very unhappy with the addition of Walters, and
the two did not work well together. With Roone Arledge as President of ABC
News, the ABC Evening News was succeeded by _ABC World News Tonight_ with a
trio of anchors: Frank Reynolds, Peter Jennings and Max Robinson. Jennings
assumed solo anchor responsibility in 1983 following Reynolds's death.

Brokaw, Rather, and Jennings became the familiar faces of network news for
more than two decades. But changes began in December 2004, when Brian Williams
took over from Brokaw as anchor of _NBC Nightly News_ , after Brokaw's well-
anticipated retirement, announced in 2002. Rather also retired from the anchor
seat of _CBS Evening News_ in March 2005, albeit quite abruptly, after it was
discovered that CBS used documents whose authenticity could not be verified in
a report on George W. Bush's Air National Guard record. Jennings stepped away
from the network anchor seat as well in April 2005, after he announced that he
had lung cancer and would undergo chemotherapy. After the announcement, _ABC
World News Tonight_ was hosted by Bob Woodruff and Elizabeth Vargas.

Jennings died in August 2005 and ABC named Vargas and Woodruff as co-anchors
of the broadcast in January 2006. Later that month, Woodruff and cameraman
Doug Vogt were injured in a roadside bomb attack while on assignment in Iraq.
His injuries were so severe, it became apparent he would not return to the
anchor chair, although he eventually recovered enough to return as an
occasional correspondent. Vargas continued on the broadcast, until May 2006,
when she announced she was stepping down and going on maternity leave.

On May 29, 2006, ABC named Charles Gibson as sole anchor of _ABC World News
Tonight_. Two months later, ABC renamed the program _World News with Charles
Gibson_. In February 2007, the program achieved the number one spot in the
Nielsen ratings for nightly news broadcasts, overtaking _NBC Nightly News_.
This was ABC's first victory since the week Peter Jennings died in August
2005, and the first time since 1996. _NBC Nightly News_ subsequently reclaimed
the lead and currently maintains a steady lead over the other programs. On
September 2, 2009, ABC announced that Mr. Gibson would retire from
broadcasting at the end of 2009, and then be succeeded by Diane Sawyer.[3]
Sawyer in turn would leave the broadcast in 2014, and was replaced by David
Muir.[4]

At CBS, Bob Schieffer took over the anchor chair at _CBS Evening News_ on an
interim basis. In an effort by CBS to reach a younger audience, _Today'_s
Katie Couric was made the new anchorperson. She is the first solo female
anchor of a broadcast network's flagship evening newscast. She stepped down in
2011 and was replaced by Scott Pelley. In 2017, it was abruptly announced that
Scott Pelley would be leaving CBS Evening News.[5] Anthony Mason acted as
interim anchor[6] until Jeff Glor was announced as the new anchor and took
over on December 4, 2017.[7]

Scandal enveloped NBC's Brian Williams after controversy over his accounts
from the Iraq War and Hurricane Katrina, causing NBC to suspend Williams for
six months starting February 2015.[8] Lester Holt was named the broadcast's
interim anchor, and in June of that year, would become the permanent anchor
for the _NBC Nightly News_ ; Holt is the first African-American to be named as
the sole weeknight anchor of a major network news broadcast.[9]

Today, electronic news gathering has enabled reporters to capture video and
audio at greater ease and edit the footage faster than when film was used.
Journalists have also employed microwave and satellite.

Television news programming in the U.S. can be separated into categories:
local news, network news, and cable news.

Many local broadcast television stations have in-house news departments that
produce their own newscasts. The content of the newscasts are geared towards
viewers in specific Designated Market Areas in which the stations operate. In
other words, the stories have a strong local focus, and are relevant to local
lives. National or international stories may also make the top stories but
local perspectives/reactions are featured in these stories.

Weather reports also play a very important role in local news as they are
found in every local newscast. Compared to national news, local news provides
more in-depth, regular and frequent coverage of weather reports relevant to a
station's viewing area. Traffic reports are featured especially during weekday
morning newscasts. Sports news are also a major regular feature during evening
newscasts, especially for local sports teams.

A station typically produces around five to seven hours of local news on
weekdays and airs fewer hours on weekends. Some stations focus more on news,
currently KTLA in the Greater Los Angeles area offers 73 and 1/2 hours per
week in newscasts (Most of any US Broadcast Station). (11.5 hours each
weekday, 6.5 hours on Saturdays and 7.5 hours on Sunday). Some stations
produce newscasts for other stations. For instance, WPVI in Philadelphia
produces a 22.00 newscast of Action News aired on WPHL.

ABC, CBS, and NBC all operate news divisions, named ABC News, CBS News, and
NBC News respectively. Their schedules are broadly similar, with minor
exceptions.

Early weekday mornings, at 4:00AM Eastern Time, all three air half-hour
programs, ABC's _America This Morning_ , CBS's _CBS Morning News_ , and NBC's
_Early Today_. _Early Today_ is the highest rated of these programs. Most but
not all of the networks' stations across the country air these early morning
national newscasts.

Following local news, ABC's _Good Morning America_ , CBS's _CBS This Morning_
, and NBC's _Today_ air. As of 2013, _Good Morning America_ is the most
watched morning news show in the United States,[10] followed by _Today_ and
_CBS This Morning_. _Good Morning America_ also airs on weekends, as does
_Weekend Today_. _CBS This Morning_ only has a Saturday edition. On Sundays,
CBS instead airs _CBS News Sunday Morning_ , a long-running arts and culture
anthology. The top stories come in the first few segments of the show but as
the minutes pass, the stories presented gradually shift to more lifestyle-
oriented and light-hearted ones. These national morning newscasts have cut-ins
to local weather and newscasts every half-hour. On weekdays, the shows air at
7:00 in each and every time zone but on weekends, they either air live or with
a 1-hour tape delay from the original broadcast in all time zones. ABC's and
CBS' morning shows are two hours long, while _Today_ has expanded to four
hours. NBC affiliates that air _Live with Kelly and Ryan_ , especially in the
east coast, tape-delay the hours preempted by this program.

On Sunday mornings, the networks air political interview programs. NBC's _Meet
the Press_ (which premiered November 6, 1947 and is currently world's longest
running television program) leads CBS's _Face the Nation_ and ABC's _This
Week_.

News briefs, a two-minute segment with a basic rundown of the largest stories
of the day, formerly aired much more frequently on all four networks,
including primetime. Currently however, the only network newsbreaks are
carried by ABC and CBS in the afternoon leading out of their daytime lineups.

In the evenings, _ABC World News Tonight with David Muir_, _CBS Evening News
with Norah O'Donnell_, and _NBC Nightly News with Lester Holt_ are the
networks' flagship news programs. After years of being largely similar, the
programs have evolved to their own niches. _World News_ emphasizes "stories
relevant to viewer's lives" delivered in Muir's laid back style; the _CBS
Evening News_ focuses prominently on business, political, and international
stories delivered in a no-nonsense style; and _Nightly News_ takes a
middlebrow, folksy approach with a balance of "hard" and "soft"
stories.[11][12] All three shows air seven nights a week, but their titular
hosts only appear on weeknights unless there is major breaking news during
weekends. On weekdays, the evening newscasts air at 6:30 in most Eastern Time
Zone and Los Angeles stations and 5:30 local time in most other time zones.

During primetime, all three networks air newsmagazine programs. ABC airs
_20/20_ Fridays at 10PM and _Primetime_ Wednesdays at 10PM. _20/20_ often airs
2 hour editions beginning at 9PM and _Primetime_ is often expanded to multiple
airings per week to fill Unlike ABC and NBC, these are not expanded to fill
holes in the schedule. NBC's _Dateline_ currently airs Tuesdays and Saturdays
at 8PM, but like ABC's programs frequently switches, adds, and drops timeslots
to fill primetime. _60 Minutes_ is the most popular of these programs, and
also the most respected journalistically, but they rarely directly compete
with one another.

On late weeknights, ABC aired _Nightline_ at 11:30 PM for many years. The
program is now seen at 12:35. From 2 to 6 AM, CBS offers its _Up to the
Minute_ , a program consisting of repeats of features from other CBS News
programs, interspersed with new news, weather, and sports updates. Few
affiliates air the entire broadcast, but most air a substantial portion of it.
ABC airs its eclectic _World News Now_ from 2AM to 3:30AM, and many affiliates
repeat a portion of it to fill time until _America This Morning_. NBC airs a
repeat of the fourth hour of _Today_ and talk show encores in these time
periods.

Unlike ABC, CBS and NBC, Fox does not air national news programs or
newsmagazines on weekdays. On Sundays it airs _Fox News Sunday_ , produced by
its sister Fox News Channel. Fox does provide coverage of breaking news of
major events such as presidential debates, primarily hosted by Fox News
Channel anchor Shepard Smith.

The advent of cable television in the United States led to the eventual birth
of cable news. On June 1, 1980, Ted Turner launched CNN, the first 24-hour
cable news operation, and sister channel Headline News followed in 1982. CNN
gained reputation significantly with its 1991 coverage of the Gulf War. The
success of CNN inspired many other 24-hour cable news stations. In 1996, Fox
News and MSNBC were launched to compete with CNN.

In 1981, the Financial News Network was launched, with a focus on finance and
business news. CNBC was launched in 1989, and bought FNN in 1991. Bloomberg
Television was launched in 1994, CNNfn in 1995, and Fox Business Network in
2007.

Regional cable news operations, such as New England Cable News, NY1, and
Pittsburgh Cable News Channel, have also gained prominence among regional
viewers.

The programming styles vary among these cable news channels, but often feature
morning shows, along with blocks of rolling news coverage hosted by various
personalities throughout the day. During the evening and primetime hours on
weekdays, most cable news networks devote their lineups to opinion-based news
and interview programs hosted by pundits. Most U.S. cable news networks do not
provide live programming during the overnight hours aside from short updates
at the top of the hour, electing to air repeats of their evening programming
instead. Some networks may source late-night programming from a sister
international news service, such as CNN International for CNN.

An increasing trend, especially in recent years is that cable networks have
become more opinion-driven during the daytime. Fewer stories are covered but
are done so with greater depth and opinion. Panellists representing both sides
of an issue appear during most newscasts to discuss them, especially on issues
of a political nature. Cable news networks also increasingly utilise newspaper
reporters, particularly those affiliated with the New York Times and
Washington Post to provide more details and offer their insights on top
political stories. Since the 21st century, more explicitly ideological
channels have arisen; in 2000, the left-wing nonprofit Free Speech TV took its
modern form, while later entries included three conservative for-profit
channels (Blaze TV, OAN and Newsmax TV) and the alt-right InfoWars.

As the Internet becomes more prevalent in American lives, television news
operations learn to adapt and embrace new technologies. Today, most television
news operations would publish the text of the stories aired during their
newscasts on their websites. Some of them, including all the network and
national cable news operations, post videos of the stories for visitors to
their websites. Most stations now offer a livestream of their local newscasts
on their websites or mobile apps. This makes it possible for viewers outside a
local station's viewing area to see its newscasts. However some footage,
notably sport footage, may be blocked from the livestream for rights reasons.
Broadcast networks also offer their evening newscasts on their website and/or
as a podcast. Cable networks provide livestreams of their channels as well as
reruns of some of their programmes through their websites and mobile apps but
access to those channels is restricted to viewers with an existing
cable/satellite subscription that includes the channels in question.

Some anchors, reporters, and notable news programs also have blogs that take
viewers behind the scenes of their news operation or provide a forum for
either the personalities or viewers to air their opinions. In recent years,
these news outlets have also provided an avenue for amateurs with digital or
mobile phone cameras to send video created by them to be used in the broadcast
and website.

Television journalists are acquiring skills for the convergence between
television and the Internet. Social media has also become a fixture on the
news as most networks, news programmes and key personalities maintain Facebook
and Twitter accounts to let viewers get late breaking news, find out what's
going on behind the scenes, as well as give comments and questions.

Technological advancement is also changing the ways news is gathered and
edited. The newsreel days are long gone. Reporters do not use film anymore.
Television journalists are capturing images and sound on video and DV. Some
stations even begin gathering and reporting news in high-definition
television. Even editing and archiving systems are evolving, as more and more
stations convert to non-linear editing systems, and storing file footage on
computer servers rather than tapes.

With digital cable comes on-demand news programming. News operations slowly
begin to feel the burden to generate news content on a 24-hour news cycle,
while keeping material fresh on their regularly scheduled newscasts. This
means around-the-clock coverage. Rather than having a certain deadline for
scheduled newscasts to meet, reporters have to file stories as fast as they
can. Producers, on the other hand, have to find more ways to keep news stories
"fresh" to the viewers.

Over the years, television news in the U.S. has evolved into a variety of
formats. Local news and network news, once similar in having slow paces and
low story counts, are now quite different in styles and tunes.

In the early days, local newscasts were seen more as a public service. The
style was straightforward. A newscast was divided into three "blocks": news,
sports, and weather. The news block was divided into national, international,
and local stories. These newscasts usually had a solo anchor, with others
announcing sports and weather as well. The stories aired were generally not
covering controversial or upsetting conflicts because the main purpose was to
attract a wide audience in order to sell expensive commercial air time. This
format is retained by some stations, though usually in smaller markets or
higher education broadcasting training departments where there are not an
abundance of everyday news stories.

In the late 1960s, Westinghouse Broadcasting, a division of Westinghouse
Electric Corporation, devised a new format of local news called "Eyewitness
News". Reporters were hired to go out of the newsroom, become "eyewitnesses"
of news stories, and record them on film. Later, these reporters were also
asked to join the anchors in the studio to talk about the stories.

Al Primo created the format, which was first used on KYW-TV in Philadelphia.
In 1968, Primo brought the format to WABC-TV in New York. The "Eyewitness
News" format helped to introduce different anchor combinations to local
newscasts. The format quickly became popular and was imitated by stations
across the country.

Today, most television news operations in the United States utilize some
variation of the "Eyewitness News" format.

"Action News" was introduced in 1970 by WPVI-TV in Philadelphia to compete
against the "Eyewitness News" format at rival station KYW-TV. This format
features short stories, high story counts, and a strong focus on spot news. It
was called "Action News" because it produced a fast-paced style of newscast.
Mel Kampmann of WPVI and Irv Weinstein of WKBW-TV in Buffalo, both owned by
Capital Cities Communications, are credited with developing the key tenets of
the "Action News" format.

Formerly referred to as "news bulletins," "breaking news" refers to any news
of sufficient importance to warrant an interruption of regularly scheduled
programming.

On a national network, programming interruptions are restricted to extremely
urgent news. On the other hand, such breaks are now common on 24-hour news
channels which often have an anchor available for live interruption at any
time. However, in recent times, a 'breaking news' banner has been used more
frequently on cable news networks to often refer to a programme's lead story.

"Franchise news" is a variation of Eyewitness News. Some stations decide to
brand their news with slogans such as "News you can use," "Coverage you can
count on," or "On your side." The newscasts at these stations tend to focus
more on franchises—stories that cover a topic important to local viewers. The
most successful franchises are health and consumer news. Other franchises
include parenting, pets, the environment, and crime fighting.

Almost every news operation uses some franchises, but a few stations build
their news identities around these topical stories.

During "sweeps," newscasts often feature stories that are more
sensationalized, in order to attract more viewers. Some stations save highly
controversial investigative stories covered earlier for airing during sweeps.

News departments at television stations work closely with promotions
departments during sweeps to create promotional spots throughout the day that
will entice viewers to tune into the newscasts.

