The **Theatre Guild** is a theatrical society founded in New York City in 1918
by Lawrence Langner, Philip Moeller, Helen Westley[1] and Theresa Helburn.
Langner's wife, Armina Marshall, then served as a co-director. It evolved out
of the work of the Washington Square Players.[2]

Its original purpose was to produce non-commercial works by American and
foreign playwrights. It differed from other theaters at the time in that its
board of directors shared the responsibility of choosing plays, management,
and production.[3] The Theatre Guild contributed greatly to the success of
Broadway from the 1920s throughout the 1970s.

The Guild has produced a total of 228 plays on Broadway, including 18 by
George Bernard Shaw and seven by Eugene O'Neill. Other major playwrights
introduced to theatre-going Americans include Robert E. Sherwood, Maxwell
Anderson, Sidney Howard, William Saroyan, and Philip Barry. In the field of
musical theatre, the Guild has promoted works by Richard Rodgers, teamed with
both Lorenz Hart and Oscar Hammerstein II, George and Ira Gershwin, Jule
Styne, and Meredith Willson, all of which have become classics. Under
President John F. Kennedy, the Guild was engaged to assemble a U.S. theatre
company, headed by Helen Hayes, to tour the capitals of Europe and South
America with works by Tennessee Williams, Thornton Wilder, and William
Gibson.[4]

In 1968, the Guild became involved in the travel field by taking 25 of its
subscribers to European capitals to see plays. In 1975, it instituted its
Theatre At Sea program with a 17-day cruise aboard the _Rotterdam_ with Hayes
and Cyril Ritchard. Since then they have hosted more than thirty cruises, each
with seven or eight performers. Among them have been Alan Arkin, Zoe Caldwell,
Anne Jackson, Cherry Jones, Richard Kiley, Eartha Kitt, Patricia Neal, Lynn
Redgrave, Gena Rowlands, Jean Stapleton, Eli Wallach, and Lee Roy Reams, who
served as the program's resident director.

The last Broadway play produced by The Theatre Guild was _State Fair_ in 1996.

