**Trasianka**[1] (Belarusian: трасянка, IPA: [traˈsʲanka]) refers to a mixed
form of speech in which Belarusian and Russian elements and structures
alternate in rapid succession.[2] There is a similar phenomenon in Ukraine, a
Ukrainian–Russian language mixture, called surzhyk.

In Belarusian the word literally means low quality hay, when indigent farmers
mix (shake: трасуць, _trasuts_ ) fresh grass/straw with the yesteryear's dried
hay.[3] The word acquired the second meaning ("language mixture of low
quality") relatively recently, in the second half of the 1980s, when a series
of publications in the literary newspaper “Litaratura i mastactva” criticized
developments in the use of the Belarusian language under Soviet rule.[4]
Zianon Pazniak is often said to be the one who has popularized the use of the
word for the Belarusian-Russian language mixture (see Pozniak, 1988). For the
Belarusian-Russian borderland it has been reported that the phenomenon usually
referred to by the term "trasianka" is called "meshanka" instead (this
information is based on an interdisciplinary research carried out in the
district of Horki and Drybin in 2004).[5]

In the area of present-day Belarus the mixing of speech has a relatively long
history. This is because the Belarusian (and, similarly, Ukrainian)
territories were for a long time borderlands in which local dialects contacted
with closely related socially dominant languages (Polish, Russian). Whether
such older forms of mixing Belarusian with Russian should be referred to as
“trasianka” is arguable as there was no intergenerational transfer of speech
in those times. A literary example for this kind of mixing can be found in the
19th-century play by Wincenty Dunin-Marcinkiewicz _The Gentry of Pinsk_ (see
the 1984 edition). Although it is a piece of art and not a record of everyday
speech, it can be assumed that it reflects real language use (in certain
situations with certain types of people) of that time. A first academic and
journalistic debate on Belarusian-Russian mixed speech took place in the
1920s.[4]

The phenomenon referred to as “trasianka” since the 1980s had its origins in
the fundamental socio-demographic changes which took place in Soviet Belarus
after World War II, and in the eastern parts of Belarus partially already
before World War II.[2] The industrialization of Soviet Belarus led to a
massive labor migration from villages to towns. While in 1959 31% of the
population lived in towns, in 1990 the urban share had already reached 66%.[6]
At the same time ethnic Russians from other parts of the Soviet Union migrated
to Soviet Belarus and, in many cases, took on leadership tasks in the
Belarusian communist party, administration and state companies. Consequently,
the language use of former Belarusian villagers - and new town dwellers - had
to adapt from (mostly dialectal) Belarusian to standard Russian, a target
which speakers seldom reached, however.[7] As a result of this struggle for
linguistic accommodation, the so-called _trasianka_ in its contemporary form
emerged, and, moreover, children of its speakers grew up using mixed
Belarusian-Russian variety.[8]

Due to the negative connotation of the word “trasianka” it has been suggested
to abandon it in the linguistic debate and use the term “Belarusian-Russian
mixed speech” instead.[9] The scientific discussion on the Belarusian-Russian
mixed speech has begun in the first half of the 1990s.[10] Influential
Belarusian scholars have pointed out the spontaneous, individual, “piecemeal”
or even “chaotic” fashion of Belarusian-Russian speech mixing.[11][12] These
‘early’ debates were based mainly on informal observations though, due to a
lack of text bodies in the mixed speech. A first empirical case study on the
phenomenon has been undertaken only in the early 2000s in the capital
Minsk.[13] In the years 2008-2013 a research project carried out by linguists
and social scientists at the University of Oldenburg (in cooperation with
partners from the Belarusian State University in Minsk) has created two bodies
of oral texts in the mixed speech .[14] The linguistic results of the
mentioned research project attested the older view that Belarusian-Russian
mixed speech could yet not be classified as one relatively stable, homogenous
fused lect all over Belarus.[2] On the other hand, on all levels of the
linguistic structure several country-wide relatively stable patterns could be
observed which the mixed speech shares with one or both of its “donor”
languages (Belarusian and Russian) or which, respectively, make the mixed
speech differ from both donor languages. Russian elements and traits clearly
dominate in the lexicon as well as in morphosyntax. The inflectional
morphology is obviously a hybrid, and even the pronunciation is influenced by
Russian. All in all, the Belarusian-Russian mixed speech in its current stage
is classified as a complex of regional social dialects.[8] Other studies keep
on describing the Belarusian-Russian mixed speech as a "chaotic" and
"spontaneous" phenomenon of language mixing.[15]

The sociological and sociolinguistic component of the above-mentioned research
project on mixed language use in Belarus showed, inter alia, the following
results: Asked about their ‘native language’, roughly 38% of around 1200
respondents named the Belarusian-Russian mixed speech, 49% Belarusian and 30%
Russian (more than one answer was allowed).[16] As their ‘first language’
roughly 50% declared the mixed speech, 42% Russian and 18% Belarusian (again
more than one answer was allowed). Finally, as their ‘primarily used language’
roughly 55% named Russian, 41% the mixed speech and 4% Belarusian. The results
of the research project contradict the popular opinion that the use of
Belarusian-Russian mixed speech is an indicator for a poor education level and
a lack of proficiency in Russian or Belarusian standard language.[16] The
mixed speech is widespread among Belarusians from all educational levels and
age groups and used alongside the standard language, which in most cases is
Russian.[9] The degree to which individuals tend to approximate ‘their’ mixed
speech use to Russian or, respectively, to Belarusian depends on such factors
as interlocutors, conversation place, topic etc. Among young Belarusians the
relative weight of mixed speech use decreases in favour of Russian.

Phonology of Belarusian-Russian mixed speech is closer to Belarusian. From the
point of view of the Russian speaker, the following distinctions are
noticeable:

Belarusian-Russian mixed speech mostly includes Russian words which have
Belarusian analogue shaped by Belarusian phonology and morphology.[17] Some
examples of high-frequency Russian words are (Belarusian and English
translations are given in parenthesis):

Many words have Russian stem, but other morphemes come from Belarusian.

Rather small part of vocabulary comes exclusively from Belarusian (Russian and
English translations are given in parenthesis when necessary):

Professional and urban lexicon are borrowed almost exclusively from Russian.

Inflection mostly conforms with the norms of the Belarusian language.[17]
Russian and Belarusian have different norms of declension, especially case
declension. For instance, in the instrumental case in Russian masculine nouns
ending in -а have inflection -ей, -ой, while in Belarusian the ending becomes
-ам – the norm that is present in Belarusian-Russian mixed speech: гаварыла з
Мишам, з Вовам ("spoke with Misha, with Vova").

Comparative form can coincide with superlative form of an adjective in
Russian: ён маладзейшы за меня ("он меня младше", "he is younger than me").

Indefinite pronouns are characterized by the presence of Belarusian stem and
Russian suffix -то (-та in Belarusian-Russian mixed speech), which indicates
an object which is unknown: хто-та ("someone"), што-та ("something"), як-та
("somehow").

As a rule, verbs in the 3rd person singular miss final -т, including verbs
coming from Russian: атвячае ("(she) answers"), знае ("(she) knows"), таргуе
("(she) sells"). In the infinitive form of Russian verbs final -ть is replaced
with -ц: весиць ("to weight"), знаць ("to know").

Postfix -ся is more frequently used, even when Russian norm requires -сь:
началася ("(she has) started"), баялася ("(she) was afraid"), прышлося ("had
to"), спуталася ("become tangled"), учылися ("(they) studied"). The imperative
form is similar to the Belarusian norm: verbs ending in -[i] or -[o], which
are under stress, i.e. ждицё мяне ("wait for me").

