The **University of Florida** (commonly referred to as **Florida** or **UF** )
is an American public land-grant, sea-grant, and space-grant research
university in Gainesville, Florida, United States. It is a senior member of
the State University System of Florida. The university traces its origins to
1853[9] and has operated continuously on its Gainesville campus since
September 1906.[10]

The University of Florida is one of 62 elected member institutions of the
Association of American Universities (AAU), the association of preeminent
North American research universities, and the only AAU member university in
Florida.[11] The university is classified as a Research University with Very
High Research by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.[12]
After the Florida state legislature's creation of performance standards in
2013, the Florida Board of Governors designated the University of Florida as
one of the three "preeminent universities" among the twelve universities of
the State University System of Florida.[13][14] For 2020, _U.S. News& World
Report_ ranked Florida as the seventh (tied) best public university in the
United States.[15]

The university is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools (SACS). It is the third largest Florida university by student
population,[16] and is the eighth largest single-campus university in the
United States with 54,906 students enrolled for the fall 2018 semester.[17]
The University of Florida is home to 16 academic colleges and more than 150
research centers and institutes. It offers multiple graduate professional
programs—including business administration, engineering, law, dentistry,
medicine, pharmacy and veterinary medicine—on one contiguous campus, and
administers 123 master's degree programs and 76 doctoral degree programs in
eighty-seven schools and departments. The university's seal is also the seal
of the state of Florida, which is on the state flag.

The University of Florida's intercollegiate sports teams, commonly known as
the "Florida Gators", compete in National Collegiate Athletic Association
(NCAA) Division I and the Southeastern Conference (SEC). In their 111-year
history, the university's varsity sports teams have won 41 national team
championships, 36 of which are NCAA titles, and Florida athletes have won 275
individual national championships.[18] In addition, University of Florida
students and alumni have won 126 Olympic medals including 60 gold medals.[19]

The University of Florida traces its origins to 1853, when the East Florida
Seminary, the oldest of the University of Florida's four predecessor
institutions, was founded in Ocala, Florida.

On January 6, 1853, Governor Thomas Brown signed a bill that provided public
support for higher education in Florida.[20] Gilbert Kingsbury was the first
person to take advantage of the legislation, and established the East Florida
Seminary, which operated until the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861. The East
Florida Seminary was Florida's first state-supported institution of higher
learning.[21]

James Henry Roper, an educator from North Carolina and a state senator from
Alachua County, had opened a school in Gainesville, the Gainesville Academy,
in 1858. In 1866,[22] Roper offered his land and school to the State of
Florida in exchange for the East Florida Seminary's relocation to
Gainesville.[23]

The second major precursor to the University of Florida was the **Florida
Agricultural College** , established at Lake City by Jordan Probst in 1884.
Florida Agricultural College became the state's first land-grant college under
the Morrill Act. In 1903, the Florida Legislature, desiring to expand the
school's outlook and curriculum beyond its agricultural and engineering
origins, changed the name of Florida Agricultural College to the "University
of Florida," a name the school would hold for only two years.[24]

In 1905, the Florida Legislature passed the Buckman Act, which consolidated
the state's publicly supported higher education institutions. The member of
the legislature who wrote the act, Henry Holland Buckman, later became the
namesake of Buckman Hall, one of the first buildings constructed on the new
university's campus.[25] The Buckman Act organized the State University System
of Florida and created the Florida Board of Control to govern the system. It
also abolished the six pre-existing state-supported institutions of higher
education, and consolidated the assets and academic programs of four of them
to form the new "University of the State of Florida." The four predecessor
institutions consolidated to form the new university included the **University
of Florida at Lake City** (formerly Florida Agricultural College) in Lake
City, the **East Florida Seminary** in Gainesville, the **St. Petersburg
Normal and Industrial School** in St. Petersburg, and the **South Florida
Military College** in Bartow.[26]

The Buckman Act also consolidated the colleges and schools into three
institutions segregated by race and gender—the University of the State of
Florida for white men, the Florida Female College for white women, and the
State Normal School for Colored Students for African-American men and
women.[27]

The City of Gainesville, led by its mayor William Reuben Thomas, campaigned to
be home to the new university.[28] On July 6, 1905, the Board of Control
selected Gainesville for the new university campus. Andrew Sledd, president of
the pre-existing University of Florida at Lake City, was selected to be the
first president of the new University of the State of Florida. The 1905-1906
academic year was a year of transition; the new University of the State of
Florida was legally created, but operated on the campus of the old University
of Florida in Lake City until the first buildings on the new campus in
Gainesville were complete. Architect William A. Edwards designed the first
official campus buildings in the Collegiate Gothic style. Classes began on the
new Gainesville campus on September 26, 1906, with 102 students enrolled.

In 1909, the school's name was simplified from the "University of the State of
Florida" to the "University of Florida."

The alligator was incidentally chosen as the school mascot in 1911, after a
local vendor ordered and sold school pennants imprinted with an alligator
emblem. The school colors, orange and blue, are a reference to the region's
heritage and an homage to the Scottish and Ulster-Scots Presbyterian heritage
of the original founders of Gainesville and Alachua County, most of whom were
settlers from North Carolina whose ancestors were primarily Presbyterians of
Scottish descent who had come to America from County Down and County Antrim in
what has become Northern Ireland, while some had come directly from the
Scottish Lowlands.[29][30][31] [32]

In 1909, Albert Murphree was appointed the university's second president. He
organized the university into several colleges, increased enrollment from
under 200 to over 2,000, and was instrumental in the founding of the Florida
Blue Key leadership society. Murphree is the only University of Florida
president honored with a statue on campus.

In 1924, the Florida Legislature mandated women of a "mature age" (at least
twenty-one years old) who had completed sixty semester hours from a "reputable
educational institution" be allowed to enroll during regular semesters at the
University of Florida in programs that were unavailable at Florida State
College for Women. Before this, only the summer semester was coeducational, to
accommodate women teachers who wanted to further their education during the
summer break.[33] Lassie Goodbread-Black from Lake City became the first woman
to enroll at the University of Florida, in the College of Agriculture in
1925.[34]

John J. Tigert became the third university president in 1928. Disgusted by the
under-the-table payments being made by universities to athletes, Tigert
established the grant-in-aid athletic scholarship program in the early 1930s,
which was the genesis of the modern athletic scholarship plan used by the
National Collegiate Athletic Association.[35]

Beginning in 1946, there was dramatically increased interest among male
applicants who wanted to attend the University of Florida, mostly returning
World War II veterans who could attend college under the GI Bill of Rights
(Servicemen's Readjustment Act). Unable to immediately accommodate this
increased demand, the Florida Board of Control opened the **Tallahassee Branch
of the University of Florida** on the campus of Florida State College for
Women in Tallahassee.[36] By the end of the 1946–47 school year, 954 men were
enrolled at the Tallahassee Branch. The following semester, the Florida
Legislature returned the Florida State College for Women to coeducational
status and renamed it Florida State University. These events also opened up
all of the colleges that comprise the University of Florida to female
students. African-American students were allowed to enroll starting in
1958.[37] Shands Hospital opened in 1958 along with the University of Florida
College of Medicine to join the established College of Pharmacy. Rapid campus
expansion began in the 1950s and continues today.[38]

The University of Florida is one of two Florida public universities, along
with Florida State University, to be designated as a "preeminent university"
by Florida senate bill 1076, enacted by the Florida legislature and signed
into law by the governor in 2013.[39] As a result, the preeminent universities
receive additional funding intended to improve the academics and national
reputation of higher education within the state of Florida.[40]

In 1985, the University of Florida was invited to join the Association of
American Universities (AAU), an organization of sixty-two academically
prominent public and private research universities in the United States and
Canada. Florida is one of the seventeen public, land-grant universities that
belong to the AAU. In 2009, President Bernie Machen and the University of
Florida Board of Trustees announced a major policy transition for the
university. The Board of Trustees supported the reduction in the number of
undergraduates and the shift of financial and other academic resources to
graduate education and research.[41] In 2017, the University of Florida became
the first university in the state of Florida to crack the top ten best public
universities according to U.S. News.[42] The University of Florida was awarded
$837.6 million in annual research expenditures in sponsored research for the
2018 fiscal year.[43] In 2017, university president Kent Fuchs announced a
plan to hire 500 new faculty in order to break into the top five best public
universities; the majority of new faculty members will be hired in STEM
fields. 230 faculty have been hired with the remaining 270 faculty to be hired
by fall of 2019.[44]

For the 2018-2019 academic year tuition and fees were $6,381 for in-state
undergraduate students, and $28,658 for out-of-state undergraduate students.
Tuition for online courses is lower and for graduate courses is higher.[45]

Other Pacific Islander

Alaska Native

In fall 2018, the University of Florida had 56,079 students in total, 37,527
(67%) being undergraduate students, 11,763 (21%) being graduate students,
3,990 (7%) being professional students, 2,642 (5%) being unclassified, and 157
(0.3%) being correspondence students. Out of all 56,079 students, 3,587 were
enrolled through UF Online. The ratio of women to men was 56:44 and 28 percent
were graduate or professional students. Professional degree programs include
architecture, dentistry, law, medicine, pharmacy and veterinary medicine.[49]
According to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, UF has "the largest Jewish student
body in the US."[50]

In 2016, the total number of International students attending the university
was 5,169.[51]

The University of Florida is ranked second overall in the United States for
the number of bachelor's degrees awarded to African-Americans, and third
overall for Hispanics.[52] The university ranks fifth in the number of
doctoral degrees awarded to African-Americans, and second overall for
Hispanics, and third in number of professional degrees awarded to African-
Americans, and second overall for Hispanics.[52] The university offers
multiple graduate programs—including engineering, business, law and
medicine—on one contiguous campus, and coordinates 123 master's degree
programs and 76 doctoral degree programs in 87 schools and
departments.[53][54]

_USN &WR_ Global Rankings[64]

In its 2019 edition, _U.S. News& World Report_ (USN&WR) ranked the University
of Florida as tied for the 8th-best public university in the United
States,[15] and tied for 35th overall among all national universities, public
and private.[65]

Many of the University of Florida's graduate schools have received top-50
rankings from _U.S. News & World Report_ with the school of education 25th,
Florida's Hough School of Business tied for 25th nationally, Florida's Medical
School (research) 43rd, the Engineering School 45th, the Levin College of Law
31st, and the Nursing School 35th in the 2019 rankings.[66]

Florida's graduate programs ranked for 2018 by _U.S. News & World Report_ in
the nation's top 50 were audiology 7th, analytical chemistry 8th, occupational
therapy 10th, criminology 12th, physical therapy 12th, pharmacy 9th,
veterinary medicine 14th, speech-language pathology 15th, physician assistant
27th, healthcare management 29th, public health 30th, statistics 30th,
chemistry 35th, physics 36th, clinical psychology 37th, psychology 40th,
history 46th, computer science 48th, economics 48th, and political science
50th.[65]

In 2013, _U.S. News & World Report_ ranked the engineering school 38th
nationally,[67] with its programs in biological engineering ranked 3rd,[68]
materials engineering 11th,[69] industrial engineering 13th,[70] aerospace
engineering 26th,[71] chemical engineering 28th,[72] environmental engineering
30th,[73] computer engineering 31st,[74] civil engineering 32nd,[75]
electrical engineering 34th,[76] mechanical engineering 44th.[77]

The 2018 _Academic Ranking of World Universities_ list assessed the University
of Florida as 86th among global universities, based on overall research output
and faculty awards.[78] In 2017, _Washington Monthly_ ranked the University of
Florida 18th among national universities, with criteria based on research,
community service, and social mobility.[78] The lowest national ranking
received by the university from a major publication comes from Forbes which
ranked the university 68th in the nation in 2018.[79] This ranking focuses
mainly on net positive financial impact, in contrast to other rankings, and
generally ranks liberal arts colleges above most research universities.[80]

In 2013, Florida governor Rick Scott announced his support for the University
of Florida to ascend into the top ten among public universities, as measured
by _U.S. News & World Report_.[81] He called for funding to decrease the
student-faculty ratio at the university.

Florida was ranked 14th in _The Princeton Review_ 's 2015 list of top party
schools.[82] It also was named the number one vegan-friendly school for 2014,
according to a survey conducted by PETA.[83]

On Forbes' 2016 list of Best Value Public Colleges, UF was ranked second. It
was also ranked third on Forbes' Overall Best Value Colleges Nationwide.[84]

The University of Florida is the flagship university of the state with 16
different colleges.[85][86][87] UF has more than 150 research, service and
education centers, bureaus and institutes, offering more than 100
undergraduate majors and 200 graduate degrees.[88][89]

These colleges include:

For the class of 2023, there were 41,407 applicants and 14,136 were accepted
for summer and fall. The average GPA for the admitted students was a 4.45 out
of 5.0, the average SAT was a 1388 out of 1600, and the average ACT was a 31
out of 36.[92]

In 2007, the University of Florida joined the University of Virginia, Harvard
University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Princeton
University in announcing the discontinuation of early decision admissions to
foster economic diversity in their student bodies.[93] These universities
assert early decision admissions forces students to accept an offer of
admission before evaluating the financial aid offers from multiple
universities. The university's single application deadline is November 1.[94]

The University of Florida has an honors program;[95] after they are accepted
to the university, students must apply separately to the Honors Program and
show significant academic achievement to be accepted. There are over 100
courses offered exclusively to students in this program.[96] In 2011, more
than 1900 students applied for 700 available seats. The Honors Program also
offers housing for freshman in the Honors Residential College at Hume Hall.
The program also offers special scholarships, internships, research, and study
abroad opportunities.[97][98]

The Lombardi Scholars Program, created in 2002 and named in honor of the
university's ninth president John V. Lombardi, is a merit scholarship for
Florida students. The scholarship offers $2,700 a semester for eight to ten
semesters.[99][100]

The J. Wayne Reitz Scholars Program, created in 1997 and named in honor of the
university's fifth president J. Wayne Reitz, is a leadership and merit-based
scholarship for Florida students. Its yearly $2,500 stipend may be renewed for
up to three years.[101][102]

The Machen Florida Opportunity Scholars Program was created in 2005. This is a
full grant and scholarship financial aid package designed to help new, low-
income UF students that are the first to attend college in their families.
Every year, 300 scholarships are awarded to incoming freshmen with an average
family income of $18,408.[103]

In 2005, the University of Florida became a Certified Audubon Cooperative
Sanctuary for environmental and wildlife management, resource conservation,
environmental education, waste management, and outreach.[104]

Through long-term environmental initiatives, the University of Florida created
an Office of Sustainability in 2006.[105] Their mission is to improve
environmental sustainability in many areas on campus. They have stated their
goals are to produce zero waste by 2015 and to achieve Carbon Neutrality by
2025.[105] Recently the university appointed a new sustainability director.
Florida received a "B+" grade on the 2009 College Sustainability Report Card
for its environmental and sustainability initiatives.[106] In 2009, "B+" was
the second highest grade awarded by the Sustainable Endowments Institute.

The university maintains a number of facilities apart from its main campus.
The J. Hillis Miller Health Science Center also has a teaching hospital at UF
Health at Jacksonville, which serves as the Jacksonville campus for the
University's College of Medicine, College of Nursing, and College of
Pharmacy.[107] A number of residencies are also offered at this facility.[107]
The University's College of Pharmacy also maintains campuses in Orlando and
Jacksonville.[108] The College of Dentistry maintains clinics in Hialeah,
Naples, and St. Petersburg.[109]

The university's Warrington College of Business established programs in South
Florida in 2004, and recently built a 6,100-square-foot (570 m2) facility in
Sunrise, Florida.[110] The Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences has
extensions in each of the 67 counties in Florida, and 13 research and
education centers with a total of 19 locations throughout the state.[111] In
2005, the university established the Beijing Center for International Studies
in Beijing that offers research facilities, offices, and degree
opportunities.[112]

The University of Florida is one of the nation's largest research
universities. According to a 2011 study by the university's Institute of Food
and Agricultural Sciences, the university contributed $8.76 billion to
Florida's economy and was responsible for over 100,000 jobs in the 2009–10
fiscal year.[113] The Milken Institute named Florida one of the top-five U.S.
institutions in the transfer of biotechnology research to the marketplace
(2006).[114] Some 50 biotechnology companies have resulted from faculty
research programs. Florida consistently ranks among the top 10 universities in
licensing.[115] Royalty and licensing income includes the glaucoma drug
Trusopt, the sports drink Gatorade, and the Sentricon termite elimination
system. The Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences is ranked No. 1 by the
NSF in Research and Development.[116] Florida ranked seventh among all private
and public universities for the number of patents awarded for 2005.[115]

The University of Florida was awarded $837.6 million in annual research
expenditures in sponsored research in 2018.[43] Research includes diverse
areas such as health-care and citrus production (the world's largest citrus
research center). In 2002, Florida began leading six other universities under
a $15 million NASA grant to work on space-related research during a five-year
period.[117] The university's partnership with Spain helped to create the
world's largest single-aperture optical telescope in the Canary Islands (the
cost was $93 million).[115] Plans are also under way for the University of
Florida to construct a 50,000-square-foot (4,600 m2) research facility in
collaboration with the Burnham Institute for Medical Research that will be in
the center of University of Central Florida's Health Sciences Campus in
Orlando, Florida.[118] Research will include diabetes, aging, genetics and
cancer.

The University of Florida has made great strides in the space sciences over
the last decade.[119] The Astronomy Department's focus on the development of
image-detection devices has led to increases in funding, telescope time, and
significant scholarly achievements. Faculty members in organic chemistry have
made notable discoveries in astrobiology, while faculty members in physics
have participated actively in the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory project, the largest and most ambitious project ever funded by the
NSF.[119] Through the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, the
University of Florida is the lead institution on the NASA University Research,
Engineering, and Technology Institute (URETI) for Future Space Transport
project to develop the next-generation space shuttle.[120]

In addition, the university also performs diabetes research in a statewide
screening program that has been sponsored by a $10 million grant from the
American Diabetes Association.[121] The University of Florida also houses one
of the world's leading lightning research teams.[115] University scientists
have started a biofuels pilot plant designed to test ethanol-producing
technology.[115] The university is also host to a nuclear research reactor
known for its Neutron Activation Analysis Laboratory.[122] In addition, the
University of Florida is the first American university to receive a European
Union grant to house a Jean Monnet Centre of Excellence.[123]

As of 2012[update], the University of Florida had more than $750 million in
new research facilities recently completed or under construction, including
the Nanoscale Research Facility, the Pathogens Research Facility[124] and the
Biomedical Sciences Building.[125][126] Additionally, Innovation Square, a
24/7 live/work/play research environment being developed along Southwest
Second Avenue between the University of Florida campus and downtown
Gainesville, recently broke ground and plans to open next fall. The
university's Office of Technology Licensing will relocate to Innovation
Square, joining Florida Innovation Hub, a business "super-incubator designed
to promote the development of new high-tech companies based on the
university's research programs. Innovation Square will include retail space,
restaurants and local businesses, and residential space.[127]

Florida has more lightning than any other U.S. state.[131] UF sponsors the
International Center for Lightning Research and Testing (ICLRT), which
occupies over 100 acres (40 ha) at the Camp Blanding Army National Guard
Base,[132] about 25 miles (40 km) northeast of UF's campus in Gainesville,
Florida. One of their primary research tools is lightning initiation from
overhead thunderclouds, using the triggered lightning rocket-and-wire
technique. Small sounding rockets, connected to long copper wires, are fired
into likely lightning storm cumulonimbus clouds. When the rocket—or its
wire—is struck by lightning, the passing of the high-voltage lightning strike
down the wire vaporizes it as the lightning travels to the ground.
Undergraduate and graduate research in UF's Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering's Lightning Research Group is used to increase new
fundamental knowledge about lightning-based phenomena.

University of Florida Health has two campuses in Gainesville and Jacksonville.
It includes two teaching hospitals and two specialty hospitals, as well as the
colleges of Dentistry, Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, Public Health and Health
Professions, and Veterinary Medicine, including a large animal hospital and a
small animal hospital. The system also encompasses six UF research institutes:
the Clinical and Translational Science Institute, the Evelyn F. and William L.
McKnight Brain Institute, the Genetics Institute, the UF Health Cancer Center,
the Institute on Aging and the Emerging Pathogens Institute. UF Health is the
only academic health center in the United States with six health-related
colleges on a single, contiguous campus.

Patient-care services are provided through the private, not-for-profit UF
Health Shands family of hospitals and programs. UF Health Shands Hospital in
Gainesville includes UF Health Shands Children's Hospital and UF Health Shands
Cancer Hospital. The specialty hospitals, UF Health Shands Rehab Hospital and
UF Health Shands Psychiatric Hospital, are also in Gainesville. UF Health
Jacksonville is the system's northeast Florida center.

UF Health has a network of outpatient rehabilitation centers, UF Health Rehab
Centers, and two home-health agencies, UF Health Shands HomeCare; as well as
more than 80 UF physician outpatient practices in north central and northeast
Florida. UF Health is affiliated with the Veterans Affairs hospitals in
Gainesville and North Florida/South Georgia.

In all, 6,159 students are enrolled in all six of the colleges.[133] The
Evelyn F. and William L. McKnight Brain Institute is also part of the Health
Science Center and is the most comprehensive program of its kind in the world.
The Institute comprises 300 faculty members from 10 colleges, and 51
departments campus-wide.[115]

The University of Florida is a winner of the National Institutes of Health
Clinical and Translational Science Award and member of the NIH national
consortium of medical research institutions. In December 2018 Expertscape
recognized it as #4 in the world for expertise in Diabetes Mellitus Type
1.[134]

UF Health Jacksonville is an academic health center with three UF colleges,
Medicine, Nursing and Pharmacy, as well as a network of primary and specialty
care centers in northeast Florida and southeast Georgia.

In 2010, Orlando Health and UF Health teamed up to form joint clinical
programs in the areas of pediatrics, neuroscience, oncology, women's health,
transplantation and cardiovascular medicine. The partnership provides
undergraduate and graduate medical residency and fellowship training
opportunities at Orlando Health, and will allow Orlando Health physicians and
patients to be part of clinical trials through UF's clinical research program.

UF Health Cancer Center at Orlando Health[135] launched in January 2014. The
center focuses on developing safe, individualized molecular-based targeted
oncology therapies to improve patient outcomes in Florida. The joint oncology
program offers clinical trial collaborations and comprehensive cancer services
customized to the patient by combining physicians and the collective strengths
of UF Health and Orlando Health.

A team of UF physicists has a leading role in one of the two major experiments
planned for the Large Hadron Collider, a 17-mile (27 km)-long, $5 billion,
super-cooled underground tunnel outside Geneva, Switzerland.[136] More than 30
university physicists, postdoctoral associates, graduate students and now
undergraduates are involved in the collider's Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
experiment, one of its two major experiments. About 10 are stationed in
Geneva. The group is the largest from any university in the U.S. to
participate in the CMS experiment. The UF team designed and oversaw
development of a major detector within the CMS. The detector, the Muon system,
is intended to capture subatomic particles called muons, which are heavier
cousins of electrons. Among other efforts, UF scientists analyzed about 100 of
the 400 detector chambers placed within the Muon system to be sure they were
functioning properly. Scientists from the University of Florida group played a
central role in the discovery of the Higgs particle. The bulk of the UF
research was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy.[137]

In July 2008, the University of Florida teamed up with the Zhejiang University
to research sustainable solutions to the Earth's energy issues. Overall a
Joint Research Center of Clean Sustainable Energy among the Florida Institute
for Sustainable Energy, at UF, and the State Key Lab of Clean Energy
Utilization and the Institute for Thermal Power Engineering, at Zhejiang
University will collaborate to work on this pressing issue.[138][139]

The University of Florida is a member of the SEC Academic Consortium. Now
renamed the SECU, the initiative was a collaborative endeavor designed to
promote research, scholarship and achievement among the member universities in
the Southeastern conference. Along with the University of Georgia, University
of Florida, Vanderbilt University and other SEC institutions, SECU formed its
mission to bolster collaborative academic endeavors of Southeastern Conference
universities. Its goals include highlighting the endeavors and achievements of
SEC faculty, students and its universities and advancing the academic
reputation of SEC universities.[140][141]

In 2013, the University of Florida was part in the SEC Symposium in Atlanta,
Georgia which was organized and led by the University of Georgia and the UGA
Bioenergy Systems Research Institute. The topic of the Symposium was, the
"Impact of the Southeast in the World's Renewable Energy Future."[142]

The George A. Smathers Libraries at the University of Florida is one of the
largest university library systems in the United States.[143] The George A.
Smathers Libraries has a collection of over 6 million+ print volumes, 1.5
million digital books, 1,000+ databases, approximately 150 thousand
print/digital journals, and over 14 million digital pages[144] Collections
cover virtually all disciplines and include a wide array of formats—from books
and journals to manuscripts, maps, and recorded music. An increasing number of
the collections are digital and are accessible on the Internet from the
library web page or the library catalog.[145]

The George A. Smathers Libraries support all academic programs except those
served by the Levin College of Law. The law school's student, faculty, and
guests are served by Lawton Chiles Legal Information Center.

In 2006, Library West went through a $30 million renovation that doubled
capacity.[146] This facility is now better equipped to handle the information
technology students need to complete their studies. Such progress is
represented by its state-of-the-art Information Commons,[147] which offers
production studios, digital media computing areas, and a presentation
area.[148]

The University of Florida campus encompasses over 2,000 acres (8.1 km2). The
campus is home to many notable structures, such as Century Tower, a 157-foot-
tall (48 m) carillon tower in the center of the historic district. Other
notable facilities include the Health Science Center, Steve Spurrier-Florida
Field at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium, Smathers Library, Phillips Center for the
Performing Arts, Harn Museum, University Auditorium, O'Connell Center, and The
Hub.[149]

The Reitz is the campus union at the University of Florida. On February 1,
2016, it was reopened after an extensive renovation and expansion. The 138,000
square feet (12,800 m2) of new space includes support space for student
organizations, new lounges, study spaces, a game room, an arts and crafts
center and dance studios.[150]

A number of the University of Florida's buildings are historically
significant. The University of Florida Campus Historic District comprises 19
buildings and encompasses approximately 650 acres (2.6 km2).[151] Two
buildings outside the historic district, the old WRUF radio station (now the
university police station) and Norman Hall (formerly the P.K. Yonge Laboratory
School), are also listed on the historic register.[152] The buildings on the
U.S. National Register of Historic Places for their architectural or historic
significance are:

UF launched a new program in the fall of 2015 called PaCE, or Pathway to
Campus Enrollment. PaCE was designed to provide an alternative way to enroll
students who would have been accepted through regular admissions, but there is
not enough space in dorms or classrooms. To be accepted into the PaCE program,
you would have been accepted to UF initially. PaCE was randomly given to
admitted students based on major. Through PaCE, students are admitted to UF,
but are required to complete 60 credit hours and all of their prerequisite
courses through UF online before transitioning to on-campus learning. The
University of Florida admitted 2,420 students for PaCE for the class of
2021.[153]

The Innovation Academy at UF is a program designed for students that want to
focus on innovation, creativity, leadership, and entrepreneurship along with
their intended major. Students that enroll in the Innovation Academy go to UF
during the spring and summer semesters so that they can participate in
internships and study abroad opportunities during the fall. IA offers 25+
different majors that all share a common minor of Innovation.[154]

Approximately 5,200 undergraduate students (or approximately 15%) are members
of either a sorority or fraternity.[155] Sorority and Fraternity Affairs
(formerly known as Greek Life) at the University of Florida is separated into
four divisions: Interfraternity Council (IFC), National Panhellenic Conference
(NPC), Multicultural Greek Council (MGC), and the National Pan-Hellenic
Council (NPHC). The Order of Omega has a chapter at the university.

The Interfraternity Council (IFC) comprises 25 fraternities, and the
Panhellenic Council is made up of 17 sororities. Some of the fraternity
chapters on campus are older than the university itself, with the first
chapters being chartered in 1884 and founded on the campus of one of the
university's predecessor institutions in Lake City.[156]

The Multicultural Greek Council consists of 12 cultural organizations (Latino,
Asian, South Asian, etc.), seven fraternities and five sororities. The
National Pan-Hellenic Council comprises nine historically black organizations,
five fraternities and four sororities.

There are also three Greek service organizations for students, two sororities
Delta Nu Zeta and Omega Phi Alpha and one fraternity, Alpha Phi Omega.

There are now also four university recognized organizations for Christian
students, Beta Upsilon Chi and Kappa Phi Epsilon fraternities as well as Sigma
Phi Lambda and Theta Alpha sororities.[157][158]

In early 2015 the Panhellenic Council announced the arrival of two new
sororities. Gamma Phi Beta was chartered in Fall 2015 and Alpha Phi will start
recruitment in Fall 2018. Construction is underway on Sorority Row for Gamma
Phi Beta's house.

Dance Marathon at UF is an annual 26.2-hour event benefiting the patients of
University of Florida Health Shands Children's Hospital in Gainesville,
Florida.[159] Each year, more than 800 students stay awake and on their feet
to raise money and awareness for Children's Miracle Network Hospitals. In the
23 years of Dance Marathon at UF's existence, more than $15 million has been
donated, making it the most successful student-run philanthropy in the
southeastern United States. In 2017, DM at UF raised a record total of
$2,724,324 for UF Health Shands Children's Hospital, becoming the second most
successful Dance Marathon in the nation.[160]

The University of Florida Reserve Officer Training Corps is the official
officer training and commissioning program at the University of Florida.
Officially founded in 1905, it is one of the oldest such programs in the
nation.

The Reserve Officer Training Corps offers commissions for the United States
Army, United States Navy, United States Marine Corps, and the United States
Air Force. The unit is one of the oldest in the nation, and is at Van Fleet
Hall.[161][162][163]

The Reserve Officer Training Corps at the University of Florida offers
training in the military sciences to students who desire to perform military
service after they graduate. The Departments of the Army, Air Force, and Navy
each maintain a Reserve Officers Training Corps and each individual department
has a full staff of military personnel.[164]

The University of Florida provides over 9,200 students with housing in
residence halls and complexes on the eastern and western sides of campus.[165]
Facilities vary in the cost of rent and privacy. Housing plans also offer
students access to dining facilities. The university also provides housing to
a number of graduate students and their families.[166] As of 2014[update], the
university is building a new residence hall on campus that will be more
accessible to students with disabilities.

The University of Florida's Department of Recreational Sports (RecSports)
includes operation of two lake-front parks at Lake Wauburg, group fitness,
personal and small group training, massage therapy, intramural sports, 51
competitive sports clubs, two world-class indoor fitness and recreation
facilities, four campus pools, outdoor rock climbing, an adventure travel
recreation program, campus fields and facilities, a skate park and staff
development services for over 700 students who are employed by the
department's programs.

RecSports manages the University of Florida Southwest Recreation Center, a
140,000-square-foot (13,000 m2) state-of-the-art facility with six indoor
basketball courts, a split-level cardio room, personal training studio,
massage therapy rooms, 14,000-square-foot (1,300 m2) strength and conditioning
area and a social lounge with a smoothie bar. Other campus facilities operated
by RecSports include the Student Recreation & Fitness Center and Broward
Outdoor Recreation Complex.

Outside of RecSports, campus recreation options include an arts and crafts
center, bowling alley and game room—all in the J. Wayne Reitz Union, and the
Mark Bostick Golf Course.

The campus also contains nature trails, open spaces, small ponds, picnic
areas, shady nooks and an 81-acre (330,000 m2) wildlife sanctuary.[167]

The UF Scientific Diver Development Program provides SCUBA training for
students interested in pursuing a career involving underwater research.

The University of Florida Student Government is the governing body of students
who attend the University of Florida, representing the university's nearly
50,000 undergraduate, graduate and professional students. The university's
student government operates on a yearly $20.4 million budget (2017-2018 fiscal
year), one of the largest student government budgets in the United States, and
the money is allocated by the Budget Committee of the Student Senate.[168]

The student government was established in 1909 and consists of executive,
judicial and unicameral legislative branches. The executive branch includes
the student government president, vice president and treasurer elected by the
student body during the spring semester, as well as nine agencies and forty-
one cabinet members.

The Student Senate is the legislative branch, and is composed of 100 senators
who serve one-year terms. The student body elects fifty senators during each
spring semester and the remaining fifty during the fall semester. The senators
elect a Senate President and Senate President Pro Tempore twice a year, after
each semester's elections, to lead the Student Senate. During student
government elections students may also vote on referendums, such as the
renewable energy referendum,[169] which was approved by 78% of voting students
in the spring of 2007. This referendum proposed a fifty-cents-per-credit-hour
increase to student activity fees to fund renewable energy and efficiency on
campus.

The student government judicial branch has two major components: the Supreme
Court of the Student Body (headed by a Chief Justice) and all elections
related officials (the Supervisor of Elections and the Elections Commission).
The Supreme Court consists of seven second or third-year law students
nominated by the Student Body President and confirmed by the Student Senate.
Each justice serves a "life-time" term, which extends through the individual
justice's graduation and insulates the court from the politics of student
government. The Chief Justice may appoint a marshal and clerk. The election
commission is also composed of law students and it adjudicates all student
government election complaints. The commission has six members, one of whom
also serves as the commission chairman.

The student government executive branch is led by the Student Body President
and includes the Student Body Vice President, Student Body Treasurer, twelve
agencies, twelve executive secretaries, nineteen cabinet directors, and three
cabinet chairs.

The alma mater for the University of Florida was composed by Milton Yeats in
1925.[170]

The university campus is served by nine bus routes of the Gainesville Regional
Transit System (RTS). Students, faculty, and staff with university-issued ID
cards are able to use the system for no additional fee. RTS also provides
other campus services, including Gator Aider (during football games), S.N.A.P,
and Later Gator nighttime service.[171]

The Gainesville region and the university are served by the Gainesville
Regional Airport, which is in northeast Gainesville and has daily flights to
Miami, Atlanta and Charlotte.[172]

The University of Florida community includes six major student-run media
outlets and companion Web sites.

Various other journals and magazines are published by the university's
academic units and student groups, including the literary journal
_Subtropics_.[175]

The University of Florida Career Resource Center is in the Reitz Student
Union. Its mission is to assist students and alumni who are seeking career
development, career experiences, and employment opportunities.[176] These
services involve on and off-campus job interviews, career planning, assistance
in applying to graduate and professional schools, and internship and co-op
placements.[177] The Career Resource Center offers workshops, information
sessions, career fairs, and advisement on future career options. Staff also
counsel students and alumni regarding resumes and portfolios, interviewing
tactics, cover letters, job strategies and other potential leads for finding
employment in the corporate, academic and government sectors.[178]

The Princeton Review ranked the Career Resource Center as the best among 368
ranked universities in career and job placement services in 2010,[179] and
fourth overall in 2011.[179]

The Florida Museum of Natural History, established in 1891, is one of the
country's oldest natural history museums and was officially chartered by the
state of Florida.[180] This facility is dedicated to understanding, preserving
and interpreting biological diversity and cultural heritage. In over 100 years
of operations the Florida Museum of Natural History has been housed in several
buildings, from the Seagle Building to facilities at Dickinson Hall, Powell
Hall, and the Randell Research Center. In 2000 the McGuire Center for
Lepidoptera and Biodiversity was opened after a generous donation from
University of Florida benefactors.[181] The McGuire Center houses a collection
of more than six million butterfly and moth specimens, making it one of the
largest collections of Lepidoptera in the world, rivaling the Natural History
Museum in London, England.[182]

The Samuel P. Harn Museum of Art, established in 1990, is also at the
University of Florida on the southwest part of campus.[183] This facility is
one of the largest university art museums in the South, the Harn has more than
7,000 works in its permanent collection and an array of temporary exhibitions.
The museum's permanent collections are focused on Asian, African, modern and
contemporary art, as well as photography.[184] The university sponsors
educational programs at the museum including films, lectures, interactive
activities, and school and family offerings. In October 2005 the Harn expanded
by more than 18,000 square feet (1,700 m2) with the opening of the Mary Ann
Harn Cofrin Pavilion, which includes new educational and meeting areas and the
Camellia Court Cafe, the first eatery for visitors of the Cultural Plaza.[185]

Performing arts venues at the University of Florida include the Curtis M.
Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, the University Auditorium, Constans
Theatre, the Baughman Center, and performances at the O'Connell Center.[186]
The mission is to provide an unparalleled experience where performing artists
create and share knowledge to serve the student body, faculty, and staff at
the university; Gainesville residents; and visitors to North Central
Florida.[187]

The University Auditorium was founded in the mid-1920s and is home to the
Anderson Memorial Organ. The auditorium has a concert stage and can seat up to
843 patrons. The venue is suitable for musical concerts, special lectures,
convocations, dance concerts, and pageants.[188]

The Phillips Center for the Performing Arts was founded in 1992 and is a
performing arts theatre. The Phillips Center is on the western side of campus,
and hosts established and emerging national and international artists on the
main stage, as well as the annual Miss University of Florida pageant and
performances by the University of Florida's original student-run dance
company, Floridance.[189] The Phillips Center consists of a 1,700-seat
proscenium hall and the 200-seat Squitieri Studio Theatre.[190]

Constans Theatre was founded in 1967 and is a performing arts venue next to
the J. Wayne Reitz Union. Constans Theatre serves as a venue for musical
concerts, theater, dance, and lectures, and is a sub-venue of the Nadine
McGuire Pavilion and Dance Pavilion.[191]

The Baughman Center was founded in 2000 and serves as a venue for small
musical and performing arts events. The facility consists of two buildings
next to Lake Alice on the western portion of campus. The main building is a
1,500-square-foot (140 m2) pavilion, while the other is a 1,000-square-foot
(93 m2) administrative building. The Baughman Center can accommodate up to 96
patrons.[192]

The University of Florida has been portrayed in several books,[193][194]
movies[195] and television shows. In addition, the University of Florida
campus has been the backdrop for a number of different books and movies.

Robert Cade, a professor in the university's College of Medicine, was the
leader of the research team that invented the sports drink Gatorade as a
hydration supplement for the Florida Gators football team in 1965–66.[196]

The University of Florida's intercollegiate sports teams, known as the
"Florida Gators," compete in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)
Division I and the Southeastern Conference (SEC).[197] The Gators compete in
nine men's sports and twelve women's sports.

For the 2014–15 school year, the University Athletic Association budgeted more
$100 million for its sports teams and facilities. Since 1987–88, the Gators
have won twenty-three of the last twenty-six SEC All-Sports Trophies,
recognizing Florida as the best overall athletics program in the SEC.[198]
Florida is the only program in the nation to finish among the nation's top ten
in each of the last thirty national all-sports standings and is the only SEC
school to place 100 or more student-athletes on the Academic Honor Roll each
of the last fifteen years.[199]

The Florida Gators have won a total of thirty-five national team
championships,[200] thirty of which are NCAA championships. Florida Gators
athletes have also won 267 NCAA championships in individual sports
events.[201] Florida is one of only two Division I FBS universities to win
multiple national championships in each of the two most popular NCAA sports:
football (1996, 2006, 2008) and men's basketball (2006, 2007).

The University of Florida fielded its first official varsity football team in
the fall of 1906, when the university held its first classes on its new
Gainesville campus. Since then, the Florida Gators football team has played in
40 bowl games, won three consensus national championships and eight
Southeastern Conference (SEC) championships, produced 89 first-team All-
Americans, 45 National Football League (NFL) first-round draft choices, and
three Heisman Trophy winners.

The Gators won their first post-season game on January 1, 1953, beating Tulsa
14-13 in Jacksonville, Florida. The Gators' first major bowl win was the 1967
Orange Bowl in which coach Ray Graves and Heisman Trophy quarterback Steve
Spurrier led the Gators to a 27–12 victory over the Georgia Tech Yellow
Jackets.

In 1990, Spurrier returned to his alma mater as its new head coach, and
spurred the Gators to their first six official SEC football championships. The
Gators, quarterbacked by their second Heisman Trophy winner, Danny Wuerffel,
won their first national championship in 1996 with a 52–20 victory over
Florida State Seminoles in the Sugar Bowl. In 2006, Urban Meyer coached the
Gators to a 13–1 record, capturing their seventh SEC Championship, and
defeating the top-ranked Ohio State Buckeyes 41–14 for the BCS National
Championship. In 2008, the Gators' third Heisman-winning quarterback, Tim
Tebow, led them in a 24–14 BCS Championship Game victory over the Oklahoma
Sooners for the team's third national championship.

Since 1930, the Gators' home field has been Florida Field at Ben Hill Griffin
Stadium, which seats 88,548 fans. The stadium is popularly known as "The
Swamp."

Center Neal Walk is the only Gator to have had his number retired by the
basketball team. The Florida Gators men's basketball team has also gained
national recognition over the past 20 years.[202] The Gators went to the Final
Four of the 1994 NCAA tournament under coach Lon Kruger,[203] and coach Billy
Donovan led the Gators back to the NCAA Final Four in 2000, losing to the
Michigan State Spartans in the final. Under Donovan, the Gators won their
first Southeastern Conference (SEC) tournament championship in 2005, beating
the Kentucky Wildcats. After repeating as SEC tournament champions in 2006,
the Gators won their first basketball national championship, defeating the
UCLA Bruins 73–57 in the final game of the NCAA basketball tournament.[204]

The Gators beat the Arkansas Razorbacks 77–56 to win their third consecutive
SEC tournament title in 2007.[205] Florida defeated Ohio State 84–75 to again
win the NCAA basketball tournament championship.

The Gators play their home games in the Exactech Arena at the Stephen C.
O'Connell Center.[206] The 10,133-seat multi-purpose indoor arena was
completed in 1980 and underwent massive renovations during the 2016–17 season.
The arena is popularly known as the "O'Dome."

Since 1968, 163 Gator athletes and 13 Florida coaches have represented 37
countries in the Olympic Games, winning 50 Olympic gold medals, 28 silver
medals and 30 bronze medals through the 2012 Summer Olympics.[207] The list of
University of Florida alumni who are Olympic gold medalists includes Brad
Wilkerson (baseball); Delisha Milton-Jones (basketball); Steve Mesler
(bobsled); Heather Mitts and Abby Wambach (soccer); Theresa Andrews, Catie
Ball, Tracy Caulkins, Matt Cetlinski, Conor Dwyer, Geoff Gaberino, Nicole
Haislett, Mike Heath, David Larson, Ryan Lochte, Anthony Nesty, Dara Torres,
Mary Wayte and Martin Zubero (swimming); and Kerron Clement, Dennis Mitchell,
Frank Shorter, Christian Taylor and Bernard Williams (track and field).

The University of Florida has more than 330,000 alumni. Over 57,000 are dues-
paying members of the University of Florida Alumni Association. Florida alumni
live in every state and more than 100 foreign countries.[208] Florida alumni
include two Nobel Prize winners, ten U.S. Senators, forty-two U.S.
Representatives, eight U.S. ambassadors, eleven state governors, eleven state
Supreme Court justices, and over fifty federal court judges. Florida graduates
have served as the executive leaders of such diverse institutions as the U.S.
Marine Corps and the National Organization for Women.

Bob Graham

Beverly Perdue

Joe Scarborough

Emmitt Smith

Faye Dunaway

Marshall Nirenberg

Stephen Stills

Carol Browner

Kevin Ford

Marco Rubio

Erin Andrews

Awards won by University of Florida faculty members include a Fields Medal,
numerous Pulitzer Prizes, and NASA's top award for research, and the
Smithsonian Institution's conservation award.[209] There are more than sixty
eminent scholar endowed faculty chairs, and more than fifty faculty elections
to the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, or Arts and Sciences, the
Institute of Medicine or a counterpart in a foreign nation. More than two
dozen faculty are members of the National Academies of Science and Engineering
and the Institute of Medicine or counterpart in a foreign nation.[115]

John Thompson

Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings

Pramod Khargonekar

Joseph Glover

Manuel Vasquez

Johannes Vieweg

Carl Van Ness

Harald von Boehmer

William Murrill

Jonathan F. Earle

Dr. W. Kent Fuchs is the president at the University of Florida. He became the
12th president in January 2015. Fuchs earned a doctorate in electrical and
computer engineering at the University of Illinois. He became a professor at
the University of Illinois. Fuchs then became the head of the electrical and
computer engineering school at Purdue and then the provost at Cornell
University for six years before taking his position at Florida.[210]

