Wikipedia is an online open-content collaborative encyclopedia; that is, a
voluntary association of individuals and groups working to develop a common
resource of human knowledge. The structure of the project allows anyone with
an Internet connection to alter its content. Please be advised that nothing
found here has necessarily been reviewed by people with the expertise required
to provide you with complete, accurate or reliable information.

That is not to say that you will not find valuable and accurate information in
Wikipedia; much of the time you will. However, **Wikipedia cannot guarantee
the validity of the information found here.** The content of any given article
may recently have been changed, vandalized or altered by someone whose opinion
does not correspond with the state of knowledge in the relevant fields. Note
that most other encyclopedias and reference works also have disclaimers.

Our active community of editors uses tools such as the Special:RecentChanges
and Special:NewPages feeds to monitor new and changing content. However,
Wikipedia is not uniformly peer reviewed; while readers may correct errors or
engage in casual peer review, they have no legal duty to do so and thus all
information read here is without any implied warranty of fitness for any
purpose or use whatsoever. Even articles that have been vetted by informal
peer review or _featured article_ processes may later have been edited
inappropriately, just before you view them.

**None of the contributors, sponsors, administrators or anyone else connected
with Wikipedia in any way whatsoever can be responsible for the appearance of
any inaccurate or libelous information or for your use of the information
contained in or linked from these web pages.**

Please make sure that you understand that the information provided here is
being provided freely, and that no kind of agreement or contract is created
between you and the owners or users of this site, the owners of the servers
upon which it is housed, the individual Wikipedia contributors, any project
administrators, sysops or anyone else who is in _any way connected_ with this
project or sister projects subject to your claims against them directly. You
are being granted a limited license to copy anything from this site; it does
not create or imply any contractual or extracontractual liability on the part
of Wikipedia or any of its agents, members, organizers or other users.

There is **no agreement or understanding between you and Wikipedia** regarding
your use or modification of this information beyond the Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 3.0 Unported License (CC-BY-SA) and the GNU Free
Documentation License (GFDL); neither is anyone at Wikipedia responsible
should someone change, edit, modify or remove any information that you may
post on Wikipedia or any of its associated projects.

Any of the trademarks, service marks, collective marks, design rights or
similar rights that are mentioned, used or cited in the articles of the
Wikipedia encyclopedia are the property of their respective owners. Their use
here does not imply that you may use them for any purpose other than for the
same or a similar informational use as contemplated by the original authors of
these Wikipedia articles under the CC-BY-SA and GFDL licensing schemes. Unless
otherwise stated Wikipedia and Wikimedia sites are neither endorsed by nor
affiliated with any of the holders of any such rights and as such Wikipedia
cannot grant any rights to use any otherwise protected materials. Your use of
any such or similar incorporeal property is at your own risk.

Wikipedia contains material which may portray an identifiable person who is
alive or deceased recently. The use of images of living or recently deceased
individuals is, in some jurisdictions, restricted by laws pertaining to
personality rights, independent from their copyright status. Before using
these types of content, please ensure that you have the right to use it under
the laws which apply in the circumstances of your intended use. _You are
solely responsible for ensuring that you do not infringe someone else's
personality rights._

Publication of information found in Wikipedia may be in violation of the laws
of the country or jurisdiction from where you are viewing this information.
The Wikipedia database is stored on servers in the United States of America,
and is maintained in reference to the protections afforded under local and
federal law. Laws in your country or jurisdiction may not protect or allow the
same kinds of speech or distribution. Wikipedia does not encourage the
violation of any laws, and cannot be responsible for any violations of such
laws, should you link to this domain or use, reproduce or republish the
information contained herein.

If you need specific advice (for example, medical, legal, financial or risk
management), please seek a professional who is licensed or knowledgeable in
that area.

